© 2011 International Monetary Fund
November 2, 2011

2011

November 2011
IMF Country Report No. 11/330
November 10, 2011

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: 2011 Article IV Consultation and Request for a ThreeYear Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility—Staff Report; Staff
Supplement–A Joint World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis; Staff Statement;
Public Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board Discussion; and
Statement by the Executive Director for Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.
Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. In the context of a combined discussion of the 2011 Article IV
consultation with Afghanistan and Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit
Facility, the following documents have been released and are included in this package:
•

The staff report for the combined 2011 Article IV consultation and Request for a Three-Year
Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility, prepared by a staff team of the IMF,
following discussions that ended on October 6, 2011, with the officials of Afghanistan on
economic developments and policies. Based on information available at the time of these
discussions, the staff report was completed on November 2, 2011. The views expressed in the
staff report are those of the staff team and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Board of the IMF.

•

Staff supplement dated 11/2/11 containing a joint World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability
Analysis.

•

A staff statement of November 10, 2011 updating information on recent economic
developments.

•

A Public Information Notice (PIN) and Press Release, summarizing the views of the
Executive Board as expressed during its November 14, 2011, discussion of the staff report on
issues related to the Article IV consultation and the IMF arrangement, respectively.

•

A statement by the Executive Director for Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

The documents listed below have been or will be separately released.
Letter of Intent sent to the IMF by the authorities of Afghanistan*
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies by the authorities of
Afghanistan*
Technical Memorandum of Understanding*
*Also included in Staff Report
The policy of publication of staff reports and other documents allows for the deletion of market-sensitive
information.
Copies of this report are available to the public from
International Monetary Fund • Publication Services
700 19th Street, N.W. • Washington, D.C. 20431
Telephone: (202) 623-7430 • Telefax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org Internet: http://www.imf.org
Price: $18.00 a copy

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and
Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
(In consultation with other Departments)
Approved by Adnan Mazarei and Dhaneshwar Ghura
November 2, 2011
Discussions: Took place over several missions from September 2010 to October 2011 in
Kabul and Washington D.C. The missions met with Mr. Omar Zakhilwal, Minister of
Finance, Mr. Abdul Qadir Fitrat, former Governor of the Central Bank, Mr. Mohibullah Safi,
Acting Governor of the Central Bank, donors, and representatives from the public and private
sectors. A press release issued at the conclusion of the discussions can be found at
http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2011/pr11358.htm.
Staff Team: The missions comprised Mr. Axel Schimmelpfennig (Head),
Mr. Enrique Gelbard (former Head), Ms. Melissa Tullis (LEG), Messrs. Aidar Abdychev,
Marcin Sasin (all MCD), Aqib Aslam, Borja Gracia (all FAD), Romain Veyrune (MCM),
and Warren Coats (MCM consultant). Mr. Adnan Mazarei (MCD) participated in some of the
policy discussions. The missions were supported by Mr. Wabel Abdallah, Resident
Representative and Ms. Mary Woolford (MCM consultant) in Kabul, and
Ms. Katrin Elborgh-Woytek (SPR) in Washington, D.C.
Exchange Arrangement: Afghanistan maintains a floating exchange rate regime, and is an
Article XIV member country. The authorities maintain that they are implementing an
exchange system without exchange restrictions and have requested a Fund review of laws
and regulations on the exchange regime for accession to Article VIII status. Staff is currently
conducting this review in order to assess the jurisdictional implications of the exchange
system of Afghanistan.
Past Surveillance: The 2007 Article IV Consultation was concluded on February 13, 2008,
and the report is available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2008/cr0876.pdf.
Statistics: Data provision has significant shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for
surveillance and program monitoring. The authorities are receiving IMF assistance on
national accounts, consumer prices, monetary statistics and the balance of payments and
Government Financial Statistics, as well as donor support in other areas of statistics.
Afghanistan has been a participant in the General Data Dissemination Standard (GDDS)
since June 2006.

2
Contents

Page

Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................4 
I. Introduction: Afghanistan’s Main Challenges ......................................................................5 
II. Recent Developments: Growth Amidst Civil Strife .............................................................9 
III. Policies to Put Afghanistan on a Path of Growth and Sustainability and Strengthen
the Financial Sector............................................................................................................11 
A. Prior Actions: Strengthening Governance and the Financial Sector.......................11 
B. Addressing Social Needs While Moving Toward Fiscal and External
Sustainability ...........................................................................................................12 
C. The Authorities’ Request for Fund Support for their 2011/12–2013/14 Economic
Program under the Extended Credit Facility ...........................................................16 
IV. Program Modalities, Risks, Technical Assistance, and Data Issues..................................21 
V. Staff Appraisal ...................................................................................................................23 
Boxes
1. The Authorities’ Response to Past Fund Advice ...................................................................5 
2. The Illicit Economy in Afghanistan .......................................................................................7 
3. The Kabul Bank Crisis ...........................................................................................................8 
4. The Evolution of the Afghan Banking System and its Regulation ......................................10 
5. Exchange Rate Assessment..................................................................................................16 
6. Key Findings and Main Recommendations of the Anti-Money Laundering and
Combating the Financing of Terrorism Assessment ...........................................................20 
Figures
1. Real Sector ...........................................................................................................................26 
2. Fiscal Sector .........................................................................................................................27 
3. Monetary Sector ...................................................................................................................28 
4. External Sector .....................................................................................................................29 
5. Social and Governance Indicators .......................................................................................30 
Tables
1. Selected Economic Indicators, 206/07–2013/14................................................................31 
2. Medium- and Long-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2010/11–2029/30 ......................32 
3a. Central Government Budget 2008/09–2013/14 .................................................................33 
3b. Central Government Budget 2008/09–2013/14 .................................................................34 
4a. Central Bank Balance Sheet, 2009–2012 ...........................................................................35 
4b. Central Bank Balance Sheet, 2009–2012...........................................................................36 
5. Monetary Survey 2008–12.................................................................................................37 
6. Balance of Payments, 2008/09–2013/14............................................................................38 

3
7. Main Socioeconomic Indicators, 2000–09 ........................................................................39 
8. Proposed Schedule of Reviews and Disbursements Under New ECF Arrangement ........40 
9. External Financing Requirement and Sources, 2010/11–2013/14 .....................................41 
10. Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010–18..........................................................42
Appendixes
I.

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Letter of Intent .............................................................43
Attachments
I. Afghanistan: Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies .........................45 
I.  Recent Developments .....................................................................................45 
II. The Economic Program For 2012–14 ............................................................48 
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy ........................................................49 
B. Financial Sector .........................................................................................51 
C. Fiscal Policy and Governance ...................................................................55 
D. Program Modalities and Monitoring .........................................................58 
II. Technical Memorandum of Understanding ...........................................................74 
I. Program Exchange Rates and Gold Valuation ..............................................74 
II. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets ............................74 
III. Adjustors .......................................................................................................79 
IV. Provision of Information to the Fund ...........................................................81 

II. Estimating the Impact of Military Transition and Transformation ....................................84 
III. Fiscal Survival and Fiscal Sustainability ...........................................................................89 

4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the world and relies heavily on donor grants to
fund development and security spending. Over the coming three to five years, the country
faces two main challenges: “transition” which refers to the withdrawal of foreign troops by
2014 and the government taking over an increasing share of security spending; and
“transformation” which refers to the expected gradual decline in overall donor support over
the medium term, with a larger share of donor support being channeled through the budget.
The above two developments will complicate policy-making and will be a drag on domestic
spending and ultimately growth. They will also entail lower foreign inflows that will require
external adjustment, initially through competitiveness gains. Fiscal policy will need to
accommodate growing spending pressures, while domestic revenue is likely to be adversely
affected, the future level of budget grants is uncertain, and Afghanistan has limited scope for
foreign borrowing. Therefore, the government will struggle for fiscal survival in the near
term, trying to make ends meet.
Afghanistan is also burdened by poor governance and a large illicit sector. Endemic
corruption and the narcotics sector have undermined the rule of law and the effectiveness of
government institutions as well as contributed to a poor business environment. The Kabul
Bank crisis is the most prominent example of the damaging effects this has on the country.
The authorities have developed a three-year program for which they seek Fund support under
the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) of SDR 85 million (52.5 percent of quota). It aims to:







Make tangible progress on Afghanistan’s social and development objectives;
Raise the revenue-to-GDP ratio through continued revenue administration reforms
and the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) in 2014;
Contain inflation through appropriate tightening of monetary policy, and ensure
adequate central bank capitalization to preserve its independence;
Strengthen financial sector stability by revising the banking law and regulations in
light of the Kabul Bank crisis, stepping up supervision and enforcement, and
enhancing the Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism
(AML/CFT) framework; and
Achieve maximum recovery of Kabul Bank losses and apply Afghan law as
appropriate in dealing with financial and economic crimes.

Staff believes that, on balance, the program stands a good chance of success, though there are
risks. A program would strengthen reforms, even while program ownership by the
government at large is mixed at best and key reforms may be delayed or thwarted altogether
by vested interests. Donors can support the authorities through their continued engagement,
and by shifting resources on budget, even within a decreasing overall grant envelope.

5
I. INTRODUCTION: AFGHANISTAN’S MAIN CHALLENGES
1.
Afghanistan has made important achievements in recent years. The authorities
have taken steps to lay the foundation for economic stability and growth, despite a very
difficult security situation and the challenges associated with building political and
economic institutions (Box 1). As a result, economic activity has been robust, with real GDP
growth averaging more than 10 percent annually over the past five years. The government
has increased revenue collection to 11 percent of GDP in 2010/11 from 8 percent in
2008/09, though current collection levels cover only about two-thirds of central government
operating expenditures and less than 20 percent of total public spending (defined as central
government spending plus off-budget donor spending).1, 2
Box 1. The Authorities’ Response to Past Fund Advice
Past Fund advice focused on tax reforms toward a more efficient tax system, including transforming the
Business Receipt Tax (BRT), a cascading sales tax, strengthening the capacity of the revenue
administration, enhancing the monetary policy instruments by expanding the role of capital notes, and
strengthening banking supervision in light of identified deficiencies in risk management at financial
institutions.
The authorities have made progress toward a more efficient tax system. A main achievement was
transforming the BRT, a cascading sales tax, into a broad-based consumption tax. Continued engagement in
revenue administration has strengthened the capacity of the Afghan revenue and customs departments. These
measures have included changes to the income tax law (including the collection of BRT on imports at the
border), a strengthening of the large taxpayers office, and a tighter monitoring of fuel imports. Most recently,
the ministry of finance has piloted a one-stop-shop customs border post in cooperation with other ministries,
following Fund advice.
The authorities have strengthened the public financial management (PFM) systems. PFM reforms are
essential for increasing the transparency and effectiveness of public spending as well as enhancing fiduciary
controls. At the 2010 Kabul Conference, international donors restated commitments to bring 50 percent of
development aid on budget. The government in turn pledged to strengthen PFM systems to facilitate such a
transfer. Therefore, continued achievements in program budgeting and other PFM systems are an integral part
of the Kabul process. At present, treasury, budgeting, and tax administration are fully functional, and the
Afghanistan Financial Management Information System (AFMIS) has been rolled out to all provinces and line
ministries.
The authorities have also made some progress towards enhancing monetary policy operations. The use of
capital notes by the central bank has increased, but more is needed to contain inflation. The supervisory
capacity of the central bank did not keep pace with a fast-growing financial sector.
1

“Public” spending is carried out by the central government “on-budget” (also known as “core budget”) and by
donors “off-budget.” In this report, the off-budget spending by donors is referred to as the “external budget” or
“external development budget.” Due to data limitations, the size of the external development budget can only be
estimated with staff taking a conservative approach that aims to take out the share of donor spending that does
not affect the local economy. Figure 1 of Annex II illustrates the relative importance of the central government
budget and the external budget and their financing sources.
2

The fiscal year follows the solar calendar and runs March 21–March 20, most of the years.

6
2.
Some poverty indicators have improved over the last decade, but Afghanistan
remains one of the poorest countries in the world. Per-capita income was US$530 in
2010/11. The national poverty rate was 36 percent in 2007/08, as measured by the National
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment, and the rates are higher in rural and mountainous areas
that account for about 80 percent of the population. Afghanistan ranks in the bottom
10 percent of countries with the lowest score in the 2010 UN Human Development Index.
The authorities have made inroads toward achieving some of the Millennium Development
Goals. For example, child mortality was reduced and school enrollment increased, albeit
from very low levels—the enrollment rate for primary schools is less than 40 percent. The
latest Annual Progress Report also acknowledges that achievements in some areas are below
expectations: more than 40 percent of children under the age of five are underweight and
progress in increasing access to potable water and sanitation remains slow. The literacy rates
for men and women aged 15 to 24 are 51 and 22 percent respectively. Overall, the low
execution rate of only 40 percent of the development budget reflects a generally limited
absorption capacity, and impedes more rapid progress toward poverty reduction.
3.
Poor governance and corruption are endemic and take a heavy toll. With decades
of war and extreme poverty and the absence of social safety nets, localized patronage has
become reinforced as the main element of social protection. The emergence of a vibrant illicit
narcotics sector has further distorted economic incentives (Box 2). This has many negative
consequences for the evolution into a rules-based market economy, including significant rentseeking behavior and high levels of crime and corruption.
4.
Last year’s crisis at Kabul Bank, the largest bank in Afghanistan, exposed the
country’s serious governance problems, and highlighted the devastating effects of
endemic corruption. The initial intervention by the central bank and a full deposit guarantee
prevented a full-blown banking crisis (Box 3). However, the subsequent crisis management
was slow and somewhat reluctant to tackle some important but politically difficult issues
such as asset recovery and filing charges against the main architects of the fraud. As a result,
the financial system has been severely weakened and is not playing its role in facilitating
private sector-led growth.
5.
Over the coming three to five years, Afghanistan will face additional challenges
as the international military presence is wound down and the government has to take
over spending currently financed by donors. Foreign troops are expected to gradually
withdraw by 2014. As a result, Afghanistan’s security forces will have to take over more
responsibility, leading to higher spending. At the same time, the government may lose
revenues related to spending by foreign troops in Afghanistan. Moreover, it is likely that the
donor footprint will gradually shrink, with total grants projected to decline from an estimated
more than 40 percent of GDP in 2010/11 to less than 30 percent of GDP in 2013/14. These
developments will weigh heavily on economic activity and require difficult decisions to
ensure fiscal survival.

7
Box 2. The Illicit Economy in Afghanistan
Afghanistan’s illicit sector is estimated to be in the range of one third to one half of the country’s GDP. The
largest illicit activities in Afghanistan are narcotics and corruption.1 Smuggling, fraud, extortion and arms trading
are also known to generate signification proceeds. These activities are all crimes in Afghanistan.
Narcotics
 Opium exports2 were US$2.8 billion (about 23 percent of GDP) in 2010, and are estimated to reach up to
US$4 billion in 2011.3 Opium from Afghanistan supplies about 90 percent of the US$68 billion global
retail market in opiates.


Opium cultivation provided income for 5 percent of the Afghan population in 2011.4 The decision to
cultivate opium is strongly correlated with conflict and access to markets; however, there is also a price
correlation mainly with the subsistence crop wheat. In addition, cannabis is extensively cultivated in
Afghanistan and yields income of up to US$94 million.5



The large profits earned by producers and traffickers are spent both inside and outside the country. In
addition to funding regular consumption and investment spending, they are also used to buy patronage,
influence and services, to reinvest in illicit cultivation and to finance investments outside the
country. Antigovernment elements and terrorist networks often collect a share of narcotics revenue akin to
a tax (ushur).



Cross-border flows related to the opiate economy are not recorded in the official balance of payments
statistics, and are reflected as unrecorded inflows (errors and omissions) or they finance equally unrecorded
imports, i.e., smuggling, over and above the estimates included in the balance of payments.

Corruption


Afghans paid an estimated US$2.5 billion in bribes in 2010 (20 percent of GDP).6 One out of every two
Afghans is thought to have to pay at least one bribe to a public official per year, with the request coming
from the official more than 56 percent of the time.7



The scale of corruption, combined with the large illicit sector, has undermined governance and
development in the country.
____________________________
1

Afghanistan is a signatory to all three international drug control conventions as well as the United Nations
Convention against Corruption.
2

The International Monetary Fund does not include the illicit sector in official estimates of GDP, or in other
macroeconomic measures. The drug economy is excluded from the output and prices measurements of “Table 1.
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators,” where opium production is listed as a
memorandum item.
3

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and Islamic Republic of Afghanistan Ministry of Counter
Narcotics, Afghanistan Opium Survey 2011, Summary Findings, October 2011, p 4. 2011 export value is Fund staff
estimate.

4

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, World Drug Report 2010.

5

United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan Cannabis Survey 2009.

6

UNODC, “Corruption in Afghanistan, Bribery as Reported by the Victims,” January 2010. Note: This survey did
not deal with grand corruption it only looked at bribes under US$1,000 (those likely to affect Afghans on a daily
basis). Total payments related to corruption therefore are likely to be far higher.
7

Ibid. p. 4.

8

Box 3. The Kabul Bank Crisis
Based on evidence available so far, it appears that Kabul Bank shareholders and top management had abused their
position to engage in criminal activity, including fraud and money laundering, by manipulating the bank’s loan
book. Concerns over the soundness of Kabul Bank caused a run on the bank in early September 2010 during
which the bank lost about half of its US$1.3 billion deposits. With one-third of the system’s assets of
US$4 billion, the crisis threatened the stability of the financial system. The authorities removed the management
of the bank, putting the bank into conservatorship, and guaranteed all deposits. This helped stem the initial panic
and stopped the run. When the dust had settled, the government had to shoulder US$825 million for the cost of the
lender-of-last-resort facility loans that covered the deposit guarantee (about 5 percent of GDP).1 Kabul Bank was
subsequently put into receivership, revoking shareholders’ rights altogether.
Aside from the fiscal costs, the Kabul Bank crisis has had a negative impact on intermediation, as it had by far the
largest and most effective branch network in the country and an effective payments system. These helped bring
individuals into the formal sector and supported the government’s program of automating employee records and
salary payments.
Kabul Bank has been split up into a good bank and a bad bank. The bank’s deposits and good assets were
transferred to a bridge bank, New Kabul Bank. For the time being, New Kabul Bank cannot extend loans and is
envisaged to be privatized in 2012. The bad assets have been retained by the receiver, appointed and overseen by
the independent Financial Dispute Resolution Commission (FDRC). Based on current estimates, about
US$935 million (principal and interest) in the asset portfolio are sought for recovery. This amount is likely to
increase as additional illegal expenses and other charges continue to be discovered by an ongoing audit. The
receiver, the FDRC, the central bank, and the Attorney General, have begun the work on asset recovery and
sorting out the disputed assets with the help of the audit firm. In parallel, the government has started an
investigation of criminal misconduct and has brought formal charges in nine cases so far.
The Kabul Bank crisis has magnified the risks of rapid banking sector growth with inexperienced supervision and
weak rule of law. Moreover, it has undermined confidence in the banking sector (preference for cash increased
and deposit growth came to a halt) and further overburdened banking supervision. On the other hand, it has
provided the authorities with valuable lessons and experience, if they are able to build on them. Only fit and
proper persons should be allowed to own and manage banks and prudential norms should be diligently enforced.
_________________________
1
To cover the hole created in the central bank’s balance sheet by the issuance of the lender-last resort loan to
Kabul Bank, the ministry of finance issued a promissory note, which would yield a regular flow of payments to
the central bank over an eight-year period. The annual payments on this promissory note have to be approved by
Parliament as part of the budget.

6.
Against this background, the authorities seek Fund support under the ECF for
their three-year economic program. In the near term, they are focusing on resolving the
problems that emerged from the collapse of Kabul Bank and ensuring the stability of the
banking system. In parallel, they intend to proceed with key reforms in revenue and
expenditure management, and strengthen the business environment for private sector-led
growth, while improving social conditions and protecting the poor. None of these reforms
will succeed in the long term unless the authorities are able to deliver on their plans to
enhance governance, address endemic corruption, and prevent economic and financial
crimes.

9
7.
The authorities’ program provides a basis for continued engagement with
donors on Afghanistan’s development strategy, including at the December 5 Bonn
Conference. Afghanistan has extensive development needs in building its physical and
institutional infrastructure, and requires continued support in transforming its economy into a
competitive and vibrant market-based system. Donor assistance and a new ECF arrangement
can help the government make progress toward Afghanistan’s development objectives.
However, such support needs to be matched by bold domestic reform, including further
bolstering of government revenues, and strengthening governance, not least in the financial
sector.
8.
The program is subject to two significant types of risks. First, there are risks that
program implementation falls short, especially due to inadequate political will or capacity
constraints, undermining macroeconomic stability and possibly leading to further large-scale
economic crime and corruption. Second, exogenous shocks, such as deterioration in the
security situation, regional instability, trade disruptions, or volatility in the agriculture sector,
could thwart the success of the program, even if fully implemented.
II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS: GROWTH AMIDST CIVIL STRIFE
9.
A standoff between the legislature and the executive over the legitimacy of last
year’s parliamentary elections has stymied the political process. President Karzai has not
yet been able to confirm his cabinet in full and a number of legislative acts have been
significantly delayed. Recently, a compromise has been reached, and Parliament has restarted
its work, although individual parliamentarians are still protesting.
10.
The security situation remains precarious and holds back economic activity.
Ongoing conflict affects the majority of Afghans. While the campaign against antigovernment elements in the South has reportedly made progress, the area remains broadly
insecure. Also, there are some signs that anti-government elements in the central and eastern
parts of the country are gaining power, while attacks in Kabul have increased in recent
months.
11.
Economic growth continues to be strong, but inflation has ratcheted up.3 Real
GDP growth exceeded 8 percent in 2010/11, thanks to buoyant manufacturing and services.
In 2011/12, growth is expected to slow to less than 6 percent, due mainly to a drought.
Headline and core inflation have moderated slightly, but remain relatively high at about
10 percent year-on-year in September, owing to an expansionary monetary policy and higher
international food and fuel prices. Confidence in the banking sector is low, as reflected in
listless deposit growth since the September 2010 collapse of Kabul Bank. Liquidity remains
high because there are few lending opportunities (Box 4). Favorable external current account
3

See Figures 1 through 5 and Tables 1 through 7.

10
developments have allowed a further buildup of international reserves to about seven months
of imports. Donor support was strong, and exports were boosted by coalition forces
purchases of domestic goods and services. The Afghani has depreciated by 5 percent against
the U.S. dollar since late March, but has stayed broadly stable in nominal and real effective
terms over the past year.
Box 4. The Evolution of the Afghan Banking System and its Regulation
Modern banking, and the credit culture that accompanies it, is new to Afghanistan. For centuries, and to
this day, the population has relied on informal money service providers to transfer cash and provide limited
lending and deposit services. These so-called hawala dealers operate on the basis of personal relationships. The
central bank currently licenses and regulates 320 money service providers, and some of these have several
hundred agents.
Since 2002, the government and the international community have promoted the formalization of
financial services. This encouraged a rapid growth of the formal banking sector with assets and deposits
increasing over 50 percent annually since 2006, as banks competed vigorously to collect deposits of newly
employed civil servants and to intermediate the inflow of foreign aid. Such rapid growth has generally been
problematic wherever it has occurred.
Aside from five branches of foreign banks, which largely service the donor and international sector,
Afghanistan’s 12 domestic banks struggled to develop normal banking practices and skills. The legal and
accounting infrastructure to support nonrelationship lending was nonexistent, weak, or untested, as were the
procedures and skills of the banks’ staffs. An ineffective judiciary and corruption hamper establishing or
recovering collateral and enforcing contracts. In a country where most births are unregistered, normal
documentation of all sorts is generally nonexistent. In such an environment, bank lending tends to be based on
relationships rather than loan (risk) assessments. Indeed, many local banks have been established around
business groups and loans are being channeled to related businesses. But when investments go wrong, the
interests of the groups tend to supersede those of depositors. As the banking system in Afghanistan grew in size
and political influence, asset quality and governance suffered.
Supervisory capacity was almost nonexistent and has struggled to catch up. After 30 years of protracted
war it was almost impossible to find enough supervisors and regulators, even with minimal education. Talented
and motivated young Afghans were and are being recruited but currently lack experience. In recognition of this
problem the central bank issued a moratorium on new licenses and introduced caps on lending for the many
low-rated banks. Critically, banking supervision has lacked political support for enforcing compliance with
rules and regulations. This failure in governance must be addressed so that a robust financial sector can support
the country’s long-term development objectives.

12.
Fiscal developments were characterized by strong revenue performance
combined with expenditure restraint. Revenue effort increased by 0.7 percent of GDP
between 2009/10 and 2010/11, following the introduction of tax and administrative measures
in early-2009 and the consolidation of earlier reforms; and continue to outperform in
2011/12 with a 25 percent year-over-year increase for the first half of the year, while
operating expenditures grew by 27 percent over the same period. Security spending rose by
1.3 percent of GDP from 2009/10 to 2010/11 as recruitment to Afghan National Security
Forces grew by over 30 percent. Nonsecurity operating spending dropped by 0.7 percent of
GDP between 2009/10 and 2010/11, notwithstanding the advance of civil service pay and

11
grade reforms and the hiring of additional teachers. As a result, the operating budget deficit
excluding grants remained broadly stable at 4 percent of GDP. Development spending fell by
1.7 percent of GDP due to continued low execution rates stemming from capacity
constraints, difficulties in public financial management, and a worsening security situation.
III. POLICIES TO PUT AFGHANISTAN ON A PATH OF GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILITY AND
STRENGTHEN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR
13.
The authorities’ program aims to lay the basis for fiscal and external sustainability
as well as financial sector stability.


The authorities recognize that restoring governance in the banking sector is a
necessary condition to safeguard economic stability and convince donors to stay
engaged, and they have made progress on the prior actions that address the issues that
have come to the fore in the aftermath of the Kabul Bank crisis.



In the context of the Article IV consultations, discussions focused on a strategy to
move toward fiscal and external sustainability and maintain macroeconomic stability
as a precondition for progress towards Afghanistan’s broader development objectives.



Against this background, the authorities have put forward an economic program for
the period 2011/12 through 2013/14 that deals with the aftermath of the Kabul Bank
crisis, strengthens the financial sector, and initiates reforms to ensure fiscal survival
as a prerequisite for fiscal sustainability.
A. Prior Actions: Strengthening Governance and the Financial Sector

14.
The authorities have taken the necessary steps to deal with the immediate
aspects of the Kabul Bank crisis. The bank has been put under receivership, its license has
been revoked, and shareholders’ rights and interests have been extinguished. The authorities
have established a bridge bank, New Kabul Bank, and developed a business plan to put it up
for sale in 2012. An audit of Kabul Bank is ongoing to establish the amounts owed by the
bank’s shareholders and related parties, and to provide information for any legal actions the
government may take; the inception report and the interim report have been delivered. After
a slow start and while available administrative, civil, and international tools have yet to be
fully applied, about US$75 million in cash (of which US$34 million from regular
performing loans) and US$153 million in assets available for sale were recovered as of
October 30, 2011 out of an estimated total amount of assets sought for recovery of
US$935 million (of which US$80 million are regular performing loans). In parallel,
repayment agreements of US$270 million have been signed, with a repayment period of

12
three to nine years.4 The ministry of finance has issued an eight-year bond to recapitalize the
central bank for the costs of the Kabul Bank crisis, and parliament approved the first
amortization payment on October 15, 2011.
15.
The authorities have also taken actions in the case of Azizi Bank, the second
largest bank. Following an intensive on-site examination of Azizi Bank, the supervisor
identified a number of areas needing improvement. An audit by a reputable international
audit firm is ongoing and will provide information to the bank’s management and the
supervisor on the degree with which laws or regulations were breached and how to further
strengthen the bank. The final audit report is expected in the first quarter of 2012. In light of
the on-site examination and the preliminary audit findings, the bank and the supervisor have
agreed on a path for increasing the bank’s capital and reducing its large exposures. The
bank’s largest shareholder has stepped down as chairman of the board to address conflict-ofinterest problems, as have the large shareholders of other banks in accordance with central
bank regulations. Continued vigilant supervision will be needed to ensure that banks fully
comply with the banking law and regulations.
B. Addressing Social Needs While Moving Toward Fiscal and External Sustainability
16.
Transition and transformation will pose significant challenges over the coming
three to five years. The growth outlook will be shaped by how these prospective developments
play out and what they imply for public investment and propoor spending. The speed at which
the authorities can move toward fiscal and external sustainability will depend on the future path
of revenue efforts and donor engagement. There is also a trade-off with the pace of progress
toward Afghanistan’s development objectives.
17.
Real GDP growth over the three-year program period (2011/12 to 2013/14) will be
significantly lower than the average of 10 percent over the past five years. The slowdown
will be driven by the withdrawal of foreign troops and the decline in grant-financed spending. A
projected recovery in agriculture from this year’s drought could temporarily boost growth in
2012/13. In addition, the nascent mining sector could also provide a positive growth impulse and
would be associated with significant foreign direct investment. To fully realize the potential
from mineral resources, a strong fiscal regime needs to be in place that ensures good
governance. The World Bank and the Fund can advise in this area.
18.
Over the medium term, fiscal policy and the level of donor engagement will be
important factors driving growth. The baseline scenario for the medium-term macroeconomic
4

The cash recoveries of US$75 million have been used as follows: US$41 million was collected during the
conservatorship and used to pay depositors and operating expenses. US$22 million was transferred to the
central bank as part of this year’s amortization payment for the promissory note issued by the ministry of
finance to the central bank for the cost of the Kabul Bank crisis. US$5 million paid for expenses of the
receivership, and the remainder is being held at the central bank in reserve.

13
framework describes a cautiously optimistic outlook. Grant-financed spending declines as a share
of GDP after 2012/13, leading to a slowdown of real GDP growth to a range of 4–6 percent
annually beyond 2013/14. Fiscal revenues receive a boost from the mining sector and the
introduction of a VAT starting in 2014/15, reaching 15 percent of GDP in 2017/18. Expenditures
are expected to average 25–26 percent of GDP, assuming a gradual and restricted takeover of
externally financed expenditure, and a very conservative level of operations and maintenance
(O&M) spending for projects handed over by donors to the government. Annex I explores
alternative scenarios. For example, by assuming a faster decline in grants and higher operations
and maintenance spending, public investment is compressed, and real GDP growth could be as
low as 2 percent per annum over the medium term.
19.
The authorities emphasized their commitment to the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy (ANDS) as their overarching policy framework. The ultimate
objective of the ANDS is to generate sustained, inclusive growth that reduces the high incidence
of poverty. The authorities noted that poverty and limited opportunities outside the illicit sector
provide a fertile ground for insurgent activities. The authorities’ strategy is to ensure that
economic growth is broadly based and beneficial both across different tiers of society and across
different regions of the country. Therefore, social programs have an important place among the
government’s fiscal priorities. The transition and transformation process will affect how the
government can pursue its ANDS objectives.5
20.
The international presence has underpinned the Afghan economy beyond security.
Quantifying the impact with any precision is difficult because of a lack of data on spending by
foreign troops in Afghanistan. Available evidence suggests that consumption spending in
Afghanistan by foreign troops, in combination with military spending on civilian activity, is
likely to have added about 2–3 percentage points to real GDP growth in recent years. The
planned withdrawal by 2014 is thus expected to have an adverse net impact on growth, reducing
growth by an estimated 2½ percentage points over the next three years. In addition, external
inflows will be reduced, negatively affecting the international reserves position. Some offset
could come from a reversal of “Dutch disease” effects associated with large-scale foreign
inflows. Indeed, Afghanistan will need to gain competitiveness to facilitate the necessary external
adjustment. An important factor in this adjustment process will be how much of the spending by
the military and donors in the past has fallen on nontraded goods, and what the adverse demand
shock for the nontraded sector implies for the real exchange rate. In the end, the adjustment could
benefit the traded sector, albeit at the cost of rising foreign currency-denominated debt service
payments.
21.
The expected gradual decline of donor assistance and activity over the medium
term will further complicate policy-making. In 2010/11, the overall fiscal deficit (excluding
5

The next Annual Progress Report will be circulated to the IMF’s Executive Board by the time of the second
review of the ECF.

14
grants) was 10 percent of GDP. If we include estimated off-budget development spending by
donors, the fiscal deficit could be as high as 23 percent of GDP. Aside from donor support,
Afghanistan has very limited scope for market financing. Of course, once domestic government
securities are available, local banks could provide some financing, but this would be insufficient
to replace external grant financing and there are clear limits from the need to preserve fiscal
sustainability. Moreover, the government will have to shoulder security spending currently paid
for by the international community as well as the recurrent cost implications of donor-financed
infrastructure projects.6 Again, incomplete data on the local content of donor spending prevents
precise estimates of these cost implications. Nevertheless, Annex II discusses possible
trajectories for key fiscal aggregates.
22.
There will be a struggle for fiscal survival for years to come, with fiscal
sustainability being a more distant goal. The authorities welcomed donors’ intention to
channel an increasing share of their support through the budget, even if the overall envelope
would shrink. They noted that donor support above and beyond the working assumption would
provide fiscal space for propoor and development spending which is severely constrained in the
current medium-term budget framework. They stressed that achieving fiscal sustainability,
defined as revenues covering operating expenditures, remains their fiscal goal, though this has
been complicated by the drawdown of the international presence in Afghanistan. Under the
program, the authorities target the operating budget balance excluding grants with a view to
keeping the deficit broadly unchanged.
23.
The expected decline in donor inflows also has implications for external stability.
The stability of the exchange rate in the medium to long term will depend critically on the
continued flow of donor assistance. In 2010/11, the current account deficit excluding official
transfers registered 40 percent of GDP. Foreign grants estimated at just over 40 percent of GDP
financed this deficit. The other side of the coin is that a large share of grants—estimated at
70 percent—is spent on imports of goods and services; thus grants do not only finance the trade
deficit, they also contribute to it. A decline in grant inflows and inflows related to spending by
foreign troops would put pressure on the exchange rate and require a corresponding adjustment
of the macroeconomic policy mix, including the exchange rate. Given the uncertainties regarding
the local component of grants and military spending, it is difficult to estimate precisely the
impact of the withdrawal on the exchange rate. The authorities have skillfully created
international reserves buffers to manage pressures in the short term. However, they will need to
maintain their flexible exchange rate regime to allow for the necessary external adjustment to
occur.

6

Current projections of security costs assume that the Afghan National Security Forces will grow to
400,000 personnel by 2014/15 as envisaged by ISAF, but discussions about the necessary troop levels are
ongoing and the final ceiling could be as low as 352,000 which would be more manageable in terms of recurrent
costs.

15
24.
The shrinking of the donor footprint will ultimately need to be met with
competitiveness gains. To ensure that external adjustment can occur in an orderly fashion,
a gradual and well-planned reduction in foreign aid would allow the exchange rate to adjust
without undermining macroeconomic stability.7 Competitiveness gains will also need to
come from strengthening the business environment (Box 5). Areas where improvements can
be made include: investor protection; property rights; collateral and property registration;
enforcement of contracts; free trade across borders; access to financing; and general red tape
combined with corruption. For instance, Transparency International’s Corruption Perception
Index for Afghanistan in 2010 was 1.4 on the scale from 0 (highest perception) to 10 (lowest
perception), making it second to worst on the ranking of 178 countries. Moreover, the
government needs to adequately support the development of small and medium-sized
businesses, which can be a source of job creation, in addition to promoting large-scale
mining enterprises. The authorities caution that the challenging security situation is a key
obstacle to quick wins in the business environment.
25.
Afghanistan remains at high risk of debt distress, recent debt relief
notwithstanding. Debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative and the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative reduced the net present value (NPV) of Afghanistan’s
debt-to-GDP ratio from 12 percent to 6 percent in 2009/10. Nevertheless, risks to the
macroeconomic outlook and large financing needs, currently met by donor support,
underscore the importance of substantial and long-term grant financing, in combination with
a strong reform agenda and progress in security and governance. Should donors decide to
reduce aid rapidly, security fail to stabilize, or delays arise in structural reforms and
governance improvements, Afghanistan’s debt burden could become unsustainable (see the
accompanying debt sustainability analysis).
26.
Public financial management reforms are expected to improve the execution of
the development budget. Low execution rates reflect capacity constraints, unrealistic
multiyear budget and spending patterns with significant front-loading of spending, and poor
procurement planning and contract management. The government has developed a road map
to address most of these issues and its implementation will improve the execution of
development projects. The overarching aim is to facilitate the transfer of additional aid
through the development budget as envisaged under the Kabul Process.

7

A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the Afghani is overvalued by 20 percent or more in
real effective terms. This is calculated as the real effective exchange rate depreciation necessary to bring about
the external adjustment that would offset the assumed decline in donor support, net of grant-related imports, in
the baseline scenario.

16

Box 5. Exchange Rate Assessment
Afghanistan’s exchange rate arrangement is classified as floating. A quantitative exchange rate assessment
using CGER-based methodologies is rendered difficult by data constraints and uncertainty about medium-term
current account developments, including the prospective path for donor financing and earnings from mineral
resources.
Since 2004/05, exports have risen steadily, and the current account deficit excluding grants has declined
from 71 percent of GDP in 2006/07 to below 40 percent in 2010/11. In August 2011, the Afghani was
slightly below its five-year average in real terms, reflecting a spike in 2008 (due to high domestic inflation) and
a decline in the following period.
Structural impediments seem more binding for Afghanistan’s competitiveness than exchange rate
developments. The World Bank’s Doing Business 2012 indicators rank Afghanistan 160th out of 183 countries
(falling from 154th place in the previous year), diagnosing particular challenges in investor protection. In 2010,
the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment index, measuring the quality of public policies
and institutions, assigned a rating of 2.6 to Afghanistan, below the average of 3.3 for all IDA countries. While
Afghanistan compared favorably with other IDA countries on macroeconomic management and budgetary and
financial management, the country ranks in the bottom decile for most other components of the index, including
property rights, governance, and the quality of public administration.1
Recorded Exports, 2007-2010, Excluding Transit Trade
(In million US dollars)

Afghanistan: Effective Exchange Rates
(Index, March 2007 = 100)
130

Real

130
125

Nominal

700

5.0

Exports (Direction of Trade)
Exports (DAB)

600

Exports (DoT), In percent of GDP (RHS)

120
120

115
110

Average REER
2007-11

110

4.0
500
3.0

400

105
100

100

95

300

2.0

200

90

90

80
Mar-07

Dec-07

Sep-08

Jun-09

Mar-10

Dec-10

1.0

85

100

80
Aug-11

0

Sources: IMF, Inf ormation Notice System; and Fund staf f calculations.

0.0
2007

2008

2009

2010

Sources: Da Af ghanistan Bank (DAB), Direction of Trade, IMF.

_________________
1
http://www.doingbusiness.org/reports/global-reports/doing-business-2012 and
http://go.worldbank.org/S2THWI1X60.

C. The Authorities’ Request for Fund Support for their 2011/12–2013/14 Economic
Program under the Extended Credit Facility
27.
The authorities’ program for the next three years outlines a realistic strategy to
start addressing the challenges discussed above. The main goals of the new program are to
make significant progress toward a stable and sustainable macroeconomic position, move
toward fiscal sustainability, strengthen the financial sector, and improve the transparency and
effectiveness of public spending while protecting the poor, and strengthening the governance
framework in the financial and economic sphere. The envisaged policies and reforms focus
on keeping inflation low, strengthening banking supervision, achieving sustained increases in

17
tax collection, gradually taking over externally-financed recurrent spending, improving
public financial management, keeping spending aligned with ANDS priorities, improving the
capacity to deal with economic crime, and reducing fiscal risks from public enterprises. The
program includes a technical assistance agenda.
28.
The focus of fiscal policy will be to make further progress on revenue generation
to meet the many and growing spending needs. Revenue measures include ongoing
administrative reforms in the customs and revenue departments (medium and large
taxpayers’ offices), and steps toward the introduction of a VAT in March 2014. Still, the
targeted increase in the revenue-to-GDP ratio amounts to only 0.6 percent of GDP over the
program period—which is basically achieved this year. In addition, political and security
risks could undermine revenue collection at the border.8 If the planned reforms do not indeed
yield more revenue gains, the authorities will have to consider additional measures. For
example, previous Fund technical assistance recommended an excise on petroleum products.
29.
On the expenditure side, the authorities need to continue to exercise tight control
over nonsecurity spending. The ongoing public financial management reforms are essential
in this context to ensure effective prioritization of spending. In particular, the authorities are
in the process of identifying propoor spending within the central government budget, with the
aim of improving integration of priority poverty reduction policies within line ministries’
budgets (indicative target). However, due to fluctuating development budget execution rates,
the pilot phase was aimed at identifying propoor operating expenditures only. In 2011/12,
propoor budgeting was piloted in two ministries—the Ministry of Education and the Ministry
of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs, and Disabled. In 2012/13, the pilot will be extended to
include the ministry of public health.9 The list will be further expanded in the coming years
to better reflect all propoor spending. For consistency, the indicative target on propoor
spending reported in Tables 3a and 3b covers all three ministries for both years. The overall
level of propoor spending is low compared to the need and is budgeted to decline as a percent
of GDP in 2012/13; the authorities will explore options for further increases to support its
social and development objectives.
30.
To exercise budget control, the Ministry of Finance closely monitors its cash
balances in the treasury single account. These balances represent the government’s
primary resources to fund the operating budget and its own discretionary development
priorities. Earlier in 2011/12, the government cut spending in anticipation of liquidity
8

Customs collections over the first six months in 2011/12 grew at only 15 percent compared to the same period
in 2010/11, slower than total revenue growth.

9

These three ministries were chosen as their operating budgets have the highest impact on poverty reduction
and strong links to ANDS priorities. The remaining ministries being targeted have propoor spending
components primarily within their development budgets, which are harder to monitor and verify.

18
shortages from a temporary loss of resources from the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund (ARTF). Assuming the full reinstatement of funds from the recurrent window of the
ARTF, balances are projected to end the year at just short of two months worth of cover for
operating expenditures, the authorities’ informal prudential target. However, there is a risk
that cash balances could be drawn down by more than targeted if additional transfers are
made to pay for development spending carried over from the previous fiscal year. Should
discretionary cash balances fall too low in 2011/12, a cash crunch could occur in the
following year.10 The government would need to monitor all outgoings very closely,
rigorously prioritizing discretionary development spending while maintaining a strong
revenue effort. By 2013/14, the government plans to issue securities (sukuks) which will
diminish its cash and liquidity risks.
31.
The nominal anchor of monetary policy is inflation. To this end, the central bank
steers reserve money and currency in circulation through the use of its own paper, so-called
capital notes, and the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. With inflation running in
the double digits, the authorities, therefore, see a need to tighten monetary policies in the
course of 2011/12 to achieve their inflation target of 4–6 percent by reducing money growth
from 30 percent in August 2011 to less than 20 percent. They note that volatile commodity
prices, including food and oil, high inflation in neighboring countries, and large inflows of
aid have complicated the conduct of monetary policy. In addition, due to concerns about its
income and balance sheet, the central bank has been hesitant to use its capital notes and
foreign exchange auctions to the full extent. The forthcoming agreement between the central
bank and the Ministry of Finance regarding central bank capitalization and responsibilities
for the costs of monetary policy should alleviate these constraints and strengthen central bank
independence. The new marketable government securities (sukuks), to be introduced by
2013/14, will add a useful monetary policy instrument, contribute to the development of the
domestic money market, and could gradually lessen the need for the central bank to issue
capital notes.
32.
Efforts to manage the Kabul Bank crisis continue. The ministry of finance and the
central bank are committed to securing maximum asset recovery from Kabul Bank, and the
government will bring legal charges where appropriate. It will be important to ensure that the
repayment agreements that have been signed, and which the authorities consider to be legally
binding, are being honored. Where this is not the case, they should use all available asset
recovery options. Failure to do so would send the signal that economic and financial crimes
pay, in particular if committed by well-connected individuals. Moreover, every dollar
recovered by the government ultimately lowers the fiscal cost of the bailout and will free
scarce resources for priority spending needs.
10

Cash shortfalls would manifest most acutely intra-year, as monthly balances could come close to zero due to
seasonality in spending and revenues.

19
33.
The authorities intend to put New Kabul Bank up for sale by mid-2012 to a
qualified investor who brings sound banking sector experience. This is somewhat later
than anticipated, mainly because it is taking longer to clean up the balance sheet of New
Kabul Bank to a point where it can be presented to potential investors. One of the objectives
of the sale is to reinvigorate Afghanistan’s stagnant banking sector by bringing international
experience and fostering competition. If the sale does not succeed, the bank would be
downsized further and either merged into other financial institutions or liquidated by March
2013. In the case of liquidation, salary and other payment services will be migrated to other
banks. To provide choice to government employees, migration will start in 2012 independent
of privatization or liquidation.
34.
Supervision and central bank independence have been weakened in the
aftermath of the Kabul Bank crisis. The central bank regrets that its supervision
department has been under aggressive investigation in the context of Kabul Bank while
prosecution of Kabul Bank shareholders and officers appears to have proceeded more slowly.
This has lowered morale and the effectiveness of supervision which has also been eroded by
the redeployment of some critical staff to the bridge bank and the receivership. Nevertheless,
the supervision department has undertaken a number of measures to strengthen its
supervision, including regular reviews of bank compliance with earlier recommendations and
the issuance of time-bound enforcement letters when appropriate. Moreover, audits by
reputable international firms—supported by the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development and the World Bank—are ongoing to provide a better view of the
financial health of ten banks, including systemically important institutions. Still, the
supervision department remains significantly understaffed and is ill-prepared should another
banking crisis emerge. The crisis also highlighted the need to build capacity in areas related
to the prevention of fraud and economic crime.
35.
To address these deficiencies and ensure strong competition in the banking sector,
the authorities are in the process of better enforcing and revising the existing banking law
and regulations. The process of overhauling the banking law and regulations has been informed
by an initial review of the Kabul Bank events by the central bank and will benefit from a
forthcoming report by the independent Monitoring and Evaluation Committee. The revisions will
aim to bring important provisions in line with the Basel Core Principles and Financial Action
Task Force recommendations, in particular, strengthening provisions on corporate governance,
beneficial ownership, capital, large exposures, related parties, enforcement, and bank resolution.

20
Box 6. Key Findings and Main Recommendations of the Assessment of the Anti-Money
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism Regime
IMF staff conducted the first detailed assessment of Afghanistan’s Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the
Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework in early 2011 using the updated 2004 assessment methodology.
The Detailed Assessment Report was adopted by the Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG) on July
21, 2011.
Afghanistan faces major money laundering and terrorist financing threats. The value of proceeds of crime
generated by drug production and trafficking and corruption in the country is significant, in both relative and
absolute terms. Smuggling and fraud also generate considerable amounts of illegal funds. In addition, terrorism
and its financing remain a major concern both in terms of the security of Afghanistan and of the funding of
terrorist individuals, organizations, and terrorist acts domestically and abroad.
Structural elements make the effective implementation of AML/CFT preventive measures challenging.
They include ongoing conflict, lack of security, vested interests and corruption, capacity constraints, nascent and
weak regulatory environment, porous borders, and low human capital. In addition, with a large share of economic
activity taking place in the informal sector and within the context of a cash-based economy, the combination of
rudimentary financial transactions and the formal sector banks, connected internationally through correspondent
accounts and Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Transactions (SWIFT), poses significant risks of money
laundering and terrorist financing. Also, with the rapid expansion of the banking sector over the last decade, the
lack of qualified and experienced supervisory and compliance staff resulted in critical failures in preventive
measures.
The Detailed Assessment Report highlights significant deficiencies in Afghanistan’s AML/CFT regime and
notes that current domestic efforts are not commensurate with the high risk of both money laundering and
terrorist financing in the country. Afghanistan has taken measures to fight crime, including financial crime,
and to lay the foundations for an AML/CFT regime. However, Afghanistan has been rated noncompliant or
partially compliant in all but one of the 49 Financial Action Task Force recommendations. Despite the
authorities’ efforts, there have been few investigations into money laundering and terrorist finance and none has
resulted in charges being brought before the courts.
The report sets out a number of recommendations for improvement, which should be prioritized to
mitigate the most serious risks that Afghanistan faces. The implementation of these recommendations will be
an important element in strengthening the institutional framework for governance. Recommended actions include
tightening and effectively implementing the legal and institutional framework regarding customer due diligence,
supervision of financial institutions, reporting of suspicious transactions to a sufficiently independent and skilled
financial intelligence unit, confiscation of criminal assets and implementation of mutual legal assistance in asset
recovery. In light of the magnitude of cross-border drug trafficking and laundering of its proceeds, special
attention should be given to the recommendations which address cross-border cash couriers and money service
providers. The scale of corruption calls for the implementation without delay of recommendations regarding
customers who are politically exposed persons. In light of the recent financial fraud, adequate fit and proper
testing of financial institutions’ beneficial owners should also be prioritized. Finally, due to the high terrorist
financing risks, the framework for freezing terrorist funds should be revised and implemented effectively. The
authorities will submit an action plan to the APG in the context of the follow-up process on their assessment.

36.
The program also includes measures to strengthen governance in the economic
and financial sphere in general. The government’s first priority is to ensure that the rule of
law prevails throughout the country and is protective of people, nascent institutions, the
economy and the financial sector. It plans to improve its ability to deal with economic crime,
and to increase transparency and accountability by tightening the application of the rule of law

21
in the financial sector so that it can face the extreme risks posed by criminality and corruption.
As part of the Kabul Process, the government has committed to a tight deadline of critical
anticorruption and governance reforms. It has established a dedicated “governance cluster” in
the ANDS and reports regularly to the international community on achievements in this area.
Given their criticality to governance and financial sector stability, staff encourages accelerated
progress on these commitments which have slowed over the course of the last year (Box 6).
37.
The authorities plan to address delays in public enterprise reform. With a view to
strengthening the financial oversight of public enterprises and thus limiting the possibility of
contingent liabilities hitting the budget while maintaining an arms-length relationship, the
authorities intend to revise the existing legal framework to bring such entities under the
ownership and effective control of the ministry of finance. With respect to the four largest
public enterprises (airline company, power utility, fuel and gas company, and
telecommunications firm), the authorities will proceed with the implementation of the
restructuring and business plans to improve their financial situation and limit fiscal risks. While
these are important steps, they may not go far enough to address the large contingent fiscal
liabilities from these public enterprises. Building an effective state-owned enterprise
monitoring capacity in the Ministry of Finance, exercising strict financial control, and properly
regulating the existing public enterprises (exposing them to full competition where possible),
are needed to address the risks from this sector.
IV. PROGRAM MODALITIES, RISKS, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND DATA ISSUES
38.
Access under the program is proposed at 52.5 percent of quota (SDR 85 million,
about US$134 million) phased in seven disbursements over three years (Table 8). The
conclusion of the debt sustainability analysis that Afghanistan continues to be at high risk of
debt distress supports the case for moderate access. Donor inflows, on which Afghanistan is
highly dependent, can be uncertain and volatile, thus calling for a sufficiently high level of
foreign reserves. During 2011/12–2013/14, the projected balance of payments gap before
grants amounts to US$19 billion, of which the Fund would contribute 0.7 percent (Table 9).
The proposed access should be sufficient to cover residual financing gaps and contribute to
reserves equivalent to about nine months of imports (excluding transit trade). Given
Afghanistan’s high dependency on aid, any sudden decline in aid could put pressure on
reserves, especially if coupled with other external or security shocks. In the absence of broad
and sustainable export opportunities, Afghanistan will require a longer adjustment period
during which the reserves need to be maintained at higher levels. Debt service obligations to
the Fund, including the new program disbursements, will remain moderate (Table 10).11

11

The relatively low level of obligations suggests that Afghanistan should not have trouble in servicing its debt
to the Fund.

22
Quantitative performance criteria have been set for March 2012 and September 2012, and
indicative targets for December 2011 and June 2012 (MEFP, Table 4).12
39.
An update safeguards assessment of the central bank is largely complete. The
central bank has strengthened elements of its safeguards framework since the
2008 assessment, but risks remain. In particular, there has been limited progress in
establishing an effective internal audit function, and governance oversight should be
strengthened. New risks have also emerged over the past year as a result of the Kabul Bank
crisis, not least due to capacity constraints, resignation of the governor and strains on central
bank autonomy. Previous safeguards recommendations on the central bank’s legal structure
and autonomy remain valid, including the need to gain clarification over coverage and
calculation of its capital shortfall. It will also be important for the central bank to address
outstanding audit recommendations and to sustain earlier progress made. The central bank is
working with IMF staff to complete the assessment and is committed to implementing its
recommendations thereafter, some of which could be integrated into program conditionality.
40.
The program is subject to significant downside risks. First and foremost, vested
interests and mixed ownership in the government at large could delay or thwart urgently
needed reforms. An important test case in this regard will be the envisaged maximum asset
recovery from Kabul Bank and bringing New Kabul Bank to the point of sale. Second, the
government’s ability to deal with the governance aspects of the Kabul Bank crisis in
accordance with Afghan laws will be a litmus test of its commitment to the rule of law and
sound economic management. Fiscal risks arise from (i) the possibility that revenue-raising
reforms such as the introduction of a VAT get delayed beyond March 2014––it is not clear
that this measure has yet garnered full ownership within the government; and (ii) the large
uncertainties over future spending needs as well as future donor support, and contingent
liabilities from poorly managed state-owned enterprises. Other risks stem from the volatile
security situation that weighs on economic activity and limits the policy space for reforms.
On the upside, Afghanistan’s mineral resources and large potential for transit trade between
Central Asia and Iran and South Asia could support growth in the coming years.
41.
A technical assistance agenda will support the program. Technical assistance from
the Fund will focus on revenue administration and tax policy reforms, public financial
management (including ongoing assistance on program budgeting and on implementing the
public financial management road map), monetary operations and treasury securities,
banking regulation and supervision, as well as improving the national accounts, price,
monetary, and external statistics.

12

The authorities consider switching from the current solar fiscal year (March 20–March 19) to a calendar fiscal
year starting in 2013. Once that decision is finalized, program monitoring and phasing will be adjusted
accordingly.

23
42.
Economic data are adequate for program monitoring and surveillance, but there
are significant shortcomings. The quality and timeliness of monetary and fiscal data are
broadly adequate, although coverage is still deficient. Other data also suffer from
weaknesses, especially data on prices, national accounts, balance of payments, and social
indicators. Fund technical assistance is being provided to strengthen statistical data systems.
In 2012, it will be useful to prepare a Report on the Observance Standards and Codes
(ROSC) on data to help develop an economic statistics plan.
V. STAFF APPRAISAL
43.
In a difficult environment, the authorities have made important progress in a
number of areas over the past few years. Most importantly, the government managed to
raise revenues through revenue administration and tax policy reforms. Moreover, average
annual real GDP growth exceeded 10 percent over the past five years, leading to an increase
of per-capita GDP to US$530 in 2010/11 from US$250 in 2005/06; this increase was also
helped by an appreciation of the exchange rate that could easily reverse. At the same time, as
these levels show, further reforms are needed in these and other areas for Afghanistan to
achieve its development objectives. The authorities have also taken politically difficult but
important steps to strengthen governance in the financial sector, including initiating audits of
Kabul Bank, Azizi Bank, and ten other banks, and establishing a path for asset recovery from
Kabul Bank, with some down payments having been received.
44.
The planned drawdown of foreign troops by 2014 and the expected gradual
decline of donor support pose very difficult macroeconomic challenges for the
authorities. Growth is likely to be adversely affected; fiscal revenues could suffer, while
spending pressures will mount as the government takes over expenditures currently being
financed by donors. Data limitations on the local impact of foreign troops and donor
spending result in considerable uncertainties about the magnitudes of these effects. To be
prepared, the authorities need to build buffers, and their targeted buildup of international
reserves is an important element of this. Exchange rate flexibility will be critical to facilitate
the necessary external adjustment as donor inflows slow. Donors can also contribute to
building buffers by considering what level of support they can continue to provide to
Afghanistan over the medium term.
45.
The authorities’ fiscal program is moving in the right direction, but could be
more ambitious. Fiscal policy appropriately aims for revenue increases; however, these are
modest compared to recent achievements. Introducing a VAT is by March 2014 the very
latest is essential to achieve the authorities’ medium-term revenue objectives, and they
should consider accelerating this measure and be more ambitious in this reform area. The
government’s emphasis on propoor spending is welcome, but the level of spending is low
and the planned increases are too little in light of the country’s poverty situation. More
generally, the intention of maintaining a tight spending envelope—for example, keeping
nonsecurity wages constant in real terms over the forecast horizon—will be difficult to

24
sustain, even though it simply reflects a lack of fiscal space. Additional pressures on the
government purse will come from the need to assume an increasing amount of security
spending and recurrent expenditures related to donor-financed projects that the government
will have to gradually take over; the projections in this report are conservative, reflecting the
lack of fiscal space. Additional spending would help Afghanistan to make faster progress
toward its development objectives if grant financing can be secured. Indeed, fiscal
sustainability is an issue and will require continued donor support, given Afghanistan’s
development needs and the limited scope to raise domestic resources.
46.
The intended monetary tightening should help return inflation to the single
digits. The degree of tightening in the authorities’ program for the next 12 months seems
appropriate, but may need to be revisited in light of inflation developments. The central bank
will have to continue relying on capital notes to steer reserve money growth. Consequently, it
is important that the government and the central bank reach an agreement on the capital
requirement of the central bank and modalities for addressing shortfalls. This will strengthen
the independence of the central bank, make it less susceptible to possible government
interference, and put it in a better position to ensure a low-inflation environment and preserve
financial and external stability.
47.
The authorities seek to address the major shortcomings in the financial sector,
and put it in a better position to play its role in fostering private sector-led growth.
Strengthening the legal and regulatory environment as well as ensuring effective supervision
are important pillars of the plan. In this context, the ongoing prudential audits of banks will
provide an independent view of the health of these financial institutions and insights into
whether there are other cases of large-scale violations of regulations and the laws. These
audits should be completed as quickly as possible and be followed up with any necessary
supervisory action, including a close monitoring of related-party lending. Staff agrees with
the authorities’ intention to sell New Kabul Bank to an investor who would bring capital and
thorough banking experience. Failing to find such an investor, New Kabul Bank should be
liquidated by March 2013 and not become a state bank. This would, inter alia, require
migrating the government salary payments to other banks.
48.
Progress in the implementation of the ANDS is mixed. The authorities have made
inroads toward achieving some of the Millennium Development Goals, but much remains to
be done. At the same time, increasing fiscal pressures are likely to threaten the delivery of
core social services. Efforts to prioritize the development objectives with the National
Priority Programs, which were initiated at the Kabul conference in July 2010, will, therefore,
be necessary to plan a development program in an increasingly resource-restricted
environment. World Bank and Fund staffs recommend a careful review of current proposals
for the National Priority Programs and to further balancing of the objectives in the ANDS
within a viable financing approach.

25
49.
Weak governance and endemic corruption are among the biggest risks to the
success of the authorities’ program. The Kabul Bank crisis and the many difficulties in
effectively dealing with the crisis have exposed the weakness of Afghan institutions in
enforcing the rule of law. Moreover, Afghanistan has a large illicit sector that perpetuates
criminal activity and one of the highest rates of corruption in the world. Significant
improvements in governance and strong measures to root out corruption are needed if a
vibrant private sector is to develop and provide opportunities for the whole population and be
the source of sustained inclusive growth. Vested interests have the means and the potential to
throw the authorities’ reform program off-track and ultimately put into question
Afghanistan’s political and economic viability. It is imperative for the government to control
these vested interests, including by fully applying Afghan law in every case of economic
crime and ensuring that all those who derived benefits from such crimes pay back in full their
unlawful gains.
50.
In addition to possible shortfalls in implementation, there are a number of other
risks to the success of the authorities’ program. A main risk stems from a possible
deterioration of the security situation as the international troops withdraw. In this scenario,
economic activity is likely to suffer, leading to additional fiscal pressures on the revenue and
spending side and possibly a liquidity squeeze. State-owned enterprises constitute a
significant contingent fiscal liability, which the authorities’ program does not address
sufficiently due to capacity constraints. More generally, low capacity—and the
corresponding dependence on international advisors—could lead to reform delays that could
ultimately undermine fiscal and external sustainability. While most risks are clearly to the
downside, there is also a possibility that growth (and fiscal revenues) may come in more
strongly if the nascent mining sector develops faster and more vigorously than currently
expected. This will require a strong fiscal regime for mineral resource development that
promotes good governance.
51.
On balance, staff supports the authorities’ request for a program, though it
notes the significant risks. Staff believes that the program stands a good chance of
providing an effective macroeconomic anchor for managing the transition and transformation
while initiating important structural reforms, essential for Afghanistan’s economic viability.
In particular, a Fund-supported program could strengthen the hand of the economic team and
provide the necessary momentum to take difficult but necessary actions while ownership in
the government at large is mixed. Staff expects that the program will have to be adjusted as
the withdrawal of foreign troops and any decline in donor support take effect.
52.
The next Article IV consultation will be held in accordance with the relevant
decision on the consultation cycle for members with a Fund arrangement.

26
Figure 1. Afghanistan: Real Sector
12

12

(a) Real GDP Growth In Comparison
(In percent, average 2005-2010)

60
50

10

60

(b) Real GDP Growth
(In percent)

50

10
Agriculture

40
8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0
Yemen

Iraq

Sudan

Tajikistan

30

Non-agriculture
20

10

10

0

0
-10

-10

-20

-20
2006/2007

2007/2008

12

(c) Value of Trade in Goods and Services
(In billions of US dollars)

30

Overall GDP
growth

20

Afghanistan

12

40

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

(d) Trade Volume
(Annual Percentage Change)

40

40

10

10
Exports

Imports

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

80

2009/2010

2010/2011

80

30

Imports

20

20

10

10

0

0

-10

-10
2006/2007

2011/2012
Proj.

(e) CPI Inflation
(In percent)

2007/2008

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

3500

3500

(f) Number of Security Incidents per Month 1/
60

60

3000

3000

2011

2500

Food

40

Exports

30

2500

40

2010
2000

2000

20

20

2009

1500

Non- food

1500

0

0

1000

Overall

1000

2006
-20

-20

-40
Jul-06

May-07

Mar-08

Jan-09

Nov-09

Sep-10

-40
Aug-11

500

0
Jan

500

2005

0
Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Sources: Afghan authorities; IMF, WEO; United Nations Department of Safety and Security; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Attacks and serious beating incidents perpetrated by anti-government elements throughout Afghanistan. They include
suicide and stand off attacks; bombings; attacks on district centers, aid and military convoys and their contractors; night letters;
assasinations; illegal check points and beatings.

Dec

27
Figure 2. Afghanistan: Fiscal Sector
8

8

(a) Central Government: Overall and Operating Balance
(In percent of GDP)

6

6

Operating balance (incl. grants)
Operating balance (excl. grants)
Overall balance (incl. grants)
Overall balance (excl. grants)

4
2

4

10

10

-6

5

5

-8

0

-4

-6
-40.6

-34.4

-8
2007/2008

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

0
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

(d) Central Government: Operating, Non-Interest Expenditures
(In percent of total)

(c) Central Government: Development Expenditures
(In percent of total)
Other
Infrastructure
Health

25

15

-4

2006/2007

25

30

Total on-budget grants
Development expenditure

15
-2

-51.7

Domestic revenue
Operating expenditure

20

-2

-63.2

30

20
0

-71.7

35

(b) Central Government: Revenue and Expenditures
(In percent of GDP)

2

0

-68.7

35

Rule of law
Education
Private sector development

Wages and salaries
Transfers and pensions

Purchase of goods and services
Capital expenditures

100

100

100

100

90

90

90

90

80

80

80

80

70

70

70

70

60

60

60

60

50

50

50

50

40

40

40

40

30

30

30

30

20

20

20

20

10

10

10

10

0

0

0

0
2006/2007

2006/2007 2007/2008 2008/2009 2009/2010 2010/2011 2011/2012
Proj.

70

70

(e) External Budget 1/
(In percent of GDP)

60

2007/2008

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

30

30

(f) Revenue and Expenditure in the Long Run
(In percent of GDP)

60
25

Grants

50

50

40

40

25
Operating
expenditure

20

20

Consumption
30

30

20

15

15

20

Investment

10
10

Revenue

10

0

0
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

5
2006/2007

2010/2011

2014/2015

2018/2019

2022/2023

Domestic
revenues fully
covering
operating
expenditures

10

2026/2027

5
2030/2031

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ Due to data limitations, the size of the external budget can only be estimated; staff take a conservative approach that aims to take out
the share of donor spending that does not impact the local economy.

28
Figure 3. Afghanistan: Monetary Sector
80

(a) Growth in Monetary Aggregates
(12-month percent change)

70

80

100

70

80

80

Credit to private sector
Demand deposits

Broad money
60

100

(b) Credit and Deposit Growth 1/
(12-month percentage change)

60

60

50

50

40

40

40

40

20

20

30

30

0

0

20

20

-20

-20

10

10

-40

-40

0

-60
Dec-07

Reserve money

60

Currency

0
Dec-07

Jun-08

25

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

Jun-11
25

(c) Credit and Broad Money
(In percent of GDP)

20

Jun-08

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

-60
Jun-11

4.5

4.5

(d) Monetary Indicators
4.0

4.0

3.5

3.5

3.0

3.0

20

Broad money

15

15

Credit to private sector
Velocity
10

10

5

5

0

0
2006/2007

2007/2008

25

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

25

(e) Interest Rates
(Annual Rate)

10

10

5

5

Dec-08

Jun-09

2.0

1.5

1.5

1.0
Dec-07

1.0
Jun-08

90

Dec-08

Jun-09

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

Jun-11

90

(f) Loan and Deposit Dollarization
(In percent of total)

85

Loan dollarization
Deposit dollarization

80

15

Jun-08

2.0

20

15

0
Dec-07

2.5

Money multiplier

85

Savings rate
Lending rate
Capital note rate (1 month)

20

2.5

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

0
Jun-11

80

75

75

70

70

65

65

60

60

55

55

50
Dec-07

50
Jun-08

Dec-08

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates.
1/ The sharp drop in credit to the private sector reflects the write-off of Kabul Bank loans.

Jun-09

Dec-09

Jun-10

Dec-10

Jun-11

29
Figure 4. Afghanistan: External Sector
4

4

25

3

15

2

2

5

5

1

1

-5

-5

0

0

-15

-15

-1

-1

-25

-25

-2

-2

-35

-35

-3

-3

-45

-45

-4

-4

-55

-55

-5

-5

-65

-65

-6

-6

(a) Current Account Balance
(Including grants, in percent of GDP)

3

2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

25

(b) Current Account Balance
(Excluding grants, in percent of GDP)

-75

-75
2006/2007

2007/2008

300

12

(c) International Reserves
280

15

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

(d) Exports
(In billions of US dollars)

5

5

Reserves (in billions of US dollars)

10

260

Reserves (in months of imports)
Reserves (in percent of Broad Money, RHS)

240

8

Goods and services

Opiates

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

220
200

6

180
4

160
140

2

120
100

0
2006/2007

2007/2008

180

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

60

(e) Exchange Rate
NEER

160

55

Exchange rate, Afghani/US dollar (RHS)

150

50

140
130

0
2006/2007

REER

170

0

2011/2012
Proj.

45

120

2007/2008

40

2008/2009

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

40

(f) Total External Debt
(In percent of GDP)

35

35

169.6

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10

10

5

5

40

110
100

35

90
80
Mar-04

Sep-05

Mar-07

Sep-08

Mar-10

30
Aug-11

0

0
2006/2007

2007/2008

2008/2009

Sources: Afghan authorities; United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Fund staff estimates.

2009/2010

2010/2011

2011/2012
Proj.

30
Figure 5. Afghanistan: Social and Governance Indicators
0.8

0.8

(a) Human Development Index
(2010)

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

Sudan

Haiti

Mauritania

Tajikistan

(c) Infant Mortality Rate
(Per 1,000 Live Births, 2010)

60

50

30

30

20

20

10

10

120

90

0
Afghanistan

Yemen

Ethiopia

Bangladesh

Kyrgyz
Republic
90

(d) Life Expectancy at Birth
(2009)

80

80

60

40

0

100

80

(b) Poverty Ratio
(In percent of total population, national definition, 2005)

40

Armenia

120

100

50

0

0
Afghanistan

60

80

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

60

40

40

20

20

0

80

Tajikistan

Sudan

Haiti

70

Afghanistan Mauritania

Mauritania Afghanistan
80

(e) Female Labor Participation
(In percent of female population, 2009)

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
Sudan

Afghanistan

Tajikistan

Haiti

Mauritania

Armenia

0

0

0
Armenia

3

2

Tajikistan

Armenia

70

(f) Employment to Population Ratio
(In percent, 2009)

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
Armenia

Mauritania

Sudan

Afghanistan

Tajikistan

Haiti

(h) Doing Business
(Rank out of 183, 2012)
174

3
135

2

Haiti

70

(g) Transparency, Accountability and Corruption
in Public Sector
(Rating out of 6, 2009)
3

Sudan

147

159

160

2

55

Afghanistan

Sudan

Tajikistan

Yemen

Sources: World Bank WDI; ILO.

Mauritania

Armenia

Armenia

Sudan

Tajikistan

Mauritania Afghanistan

Haiti

31
Table 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006/07–2013/14
(Quota: SDR 161.9 million)
(Population: approx. 30 million; 2010/11)
(Per capita GDP: US$530; 2010/11)
(Poverty rate: 36 percent; 2007/08)
(Main export: dried fruit, US$210 million; 2009/10)
2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10

5.6
352
7.1
5.1
3.5
7.3
4.8

13.7
436
8.7
13.0
19.2
4.7
20.7

3.6
534
10.5
26.8
37.6
9.9
3.2

Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Of which: Private
Gross domestic savings
Of which: Private

43.6
8.2
38.1
5.7

40.6
8.6
41.9
12.2

36.4
9.0
37.3
14.0

31.7
8.7
28.9
7.5

18.3
8.2
10.2
21.5
12.3
9.2
-3.1

19.9
7.7
12.3
22.0
11.6
10.3
-2.0

17.5
7.8
9.8
21.7
13.1
8.6
-4.1

1.3
-4.2

1.4
-4.0

0.2
-5.3

Monetary sector
Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Broad money
Interest rate, 28-day capital note (end-period, in percent)

2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Projection

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)

Output and prices 1/
Real GDP
Nominal GDP (in billions of Afghanis)
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)
Consumer prices (period average)
Food
Non-food
Consumer prices (end of period)

Public finances
Domestic revenues and grants
Domestic revenues
Grants
Expenditures
Operating 2/
Development
Overall balance (including grants)
Operating balance
Including grants 3/
Excluding grants 4/

2010/11
Prel.

21.0
615
12.5
-12.2
-19.5
1.9
-5.1

8.4
730
15.9
7.7
7.3
8.3
16.6

5.7
862
18.4
10.5
8.1
14.2
7.7

7.1
968
19.6
4.6
4.7
4.6
5.0

5.8
1,074
21.0
5.0
...
...
5.0

26.3
8.5
27.9
9.2

22.6
8.6
22.6
8.6

21.9
8.9
20.9
9.3

21.6
9.5
19.0
8.5

20.5
10.3
10.2
22.1
14.5
7.6
-1.6

22.0
11.0
11.0
21.1
15.1
5.9
0.9

23.7
11.5
12.2
23.8
17.6
6.2
0.0

23.7
11.3
12.4
25.3
18.6
6.6
-1.6

24.0
11.6
12.4
25.7
18.7
7.0
-1.7

1.2
-4.2

3.3
-4.1

1.6
-6.1

0.4
-7.4

0.2
-7.1

(In percent of GDP)

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
22.3
13.3
...
7.6

14.4
17.0
31.0
14.9

64.9
30.4
35.9
8.9

17.1
28.5
39.3
4.3

21.3
34.2
22.6
2.4

18.8
17.8
18.3
...

17.1
16.8
15.1
...

16.2
16.0
17.1
...

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

External sector 1/
Exports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change) 5/
Imports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change)
Merchandise trade balance
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Foreign direct investment
Total external debt 6/
Gross international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
(Import coverage) 7/
(Relative to external debt service due)
Afghanis per U.S. dollar (average)
Real effective exchange rate (average, percentage change)

1.4
10.0
-69.7

1.8
15.6
-67.9

33.0
14.8
-61.9

2.1
-0.8
-50.9

12.7
3.0
-39.6

2.5
0.4
-34.1

-8.8
0.0
-33.3

-3.4
0.6
-31.7

-71.1
-5.6
2.7
169.6
2,040
3.4
79
49.9
-2.0

-68.1
1.3
2.8
23.0
2,784
4.1
43
49.8
3.1

-59.6
0.9
2.9
19.7
3,591
5.3
215
51.0
14.3

-51.3
-2.8
2.4
9.2
4,209
6.0
213
49.3
-17.0

-39.8
1.7
2.1
8.0
5,321
7.4
425
45.8
13.9

-34.3
0.1
2.1
7.9
6,121
8.4
425
...
…

-33.2
-1.1
2.3
8.6
6,627
9.0
298
...
…

-31.5
-2.6
2.9
9.1
7,178
9.5
165
...
…

Memorandum items:
Opium statistics (wet opium)
Production (in tons)
Price (in U.S. dollars per kilogram)
External budget grants (in percent of GDP) 8/

6,100
94
55.4

8,200
86
57.4

7,700
70
49.3

6,900
48
39.9

3,600
128
30.5

...
...
22.1

...
...
19.7

...
...
16.5

Source: Afghan authorities; United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding the narcotics economy.
2/ Comprising mainly current spending.
3/ Defined as domestic revenues plus operating grants minus operating expenditures.
4/ Defined as domestic revenues minus operating expenditures.
5/ Includes official recorded exports, estimates of smuggling, reexports and sales to nonresidents.
6/ After HIPC and MDRI debt relief, as well as debt relief beyond HIPC relief from Paris Club creditors. Debt includes obligations to the IMF.
7/ Gross reserves in months of next year's imports of goods and services, excluding imports for reexport.
8/ Estimated direct expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the government budget.

Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Medium and Long-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2010/11–2029/30
Projection
2010/11
Prel.

Medium Term
2011/12 2012/13 2013/14

Long Term
2017/18 2019/20 2021/22 2024/25 2026/27 2029/30

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Output and prices 1/
Real GDP
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Consumer prices (period average)

8.4
528
7.7

5.7
591
10.5

7.1
612
4.6

Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Of which: Private
Gross domestic savings
Of which: Private

26.3
8.5
27.9
9.2

22.6
8.6
22.6
8.6

21.9
8.9
20.9
9.3

21.6
9.5
19.0
8.5

23.6
13.7
19.0
10.7

25.6
16.2
21.8
14.7

22.0
11.0
11.0
21.1
15.1
5.9
0.9

23.7
11.5
12.2
23.8
17.6
6.2
0.0

23.7
11.3
12.4
25.3
18.6
6.6
-1.6

24.0
11.6
12.4
25.7
18.7
7.0
-1.7

23.4
15.6
7.7
25.1
17.4
7.7
-1.7

3.3
-4.1

1.6
-6.1

0.4
-7.4

0.2
-7.1

17.8
57.4
-39.6

15.8
50.0
-34.1

13.5
46.8
-33.3

-39.8
1.7
5,321

-34.3
0.1
6,121

30.5
8.0
8.0

22.1
7.9
12.1

External sector 1/
Exports of goods 5/
Imports of goods
Merchandise trade balance
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
External budget grants 6/
Total external debt 7/
Public sector debt

6.6
758
5.0

5.6
802
4.8

5.4
860
4.5

3.9
918
4.1

4.0
969
4.0

4.0
1,062
4.0

25.1
16.1
22.4
15.7

23.2
15.0
21.8
15.9

22.3
14.6
21.5
16.0

21.0
13.8
21.1
16.0

22.1
15.5
6.6
24.6
16.5
8.1
-2.5

22.5
16.4
6.1
25.1
16.7
8.4
-2.6

22.8
17.4
5.4
25.3
17.4
8.0
-2.6

22.8
17.9
4.9
25.4
17.7
7.7
-2.6

23.0
18.5
4.5
25.5
18.2
7.3
-2.5

0.9
-1.7

-0.9
-1.0

-0.3
-0.3

0.0
0.0

0.2
0.2

0.3
0.3

12.2
43.9
-31.7

17.3
36.2
-18.9

17.5
32.5
-15.0

20.1
31.2
-11.1

20.3
27.8
-7.6

20.2
26.3
-6.0

20.1
24.3
-4.2

-33.2
-1.1
6,627

-31.5
-2.6
7,178

-21.3
-4.6
6,877

-17.3
-3.7
6,732

-14.1
-2.8
6,410

-10.4
-1.4
5,928

-8.5
-0.8
5,830

-6.3
0.1
5,691

19.7
8.6
13.7

16.5
9.1
15.2

9.0
10.6
13.4

6.9
11.6
14.7

5.2
12.6
17.3

3.6
14.9
21.0

2.8
16.3
23.3

2.0
17.8
26.1

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding the narcotics economy.
2/ Comprising mainly current spending.
3/ Defined as domestic revenues plus operating grants minus operating expenditures.
4/ Defined as domestic revenues minus operating expenditures.
5/ Includes official recorded exports, estimates of smuggling, reexports and sales to nonresidents.
6/ Estimated direct expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the government budget.
7/ After HIPC and MDRI debt relief, as well as debt relief beyond HIPC relief from Paris Club creditors. Debt includes obligations to the IMF.

32

Public finances
Domestic revenues and grants
Domestic revenues
Grants
Expenditures
Operating 2/
Development
Overall balance (including grants)
Operating balance
Including grants 3/
Excluding grants 4/

5.8
637
5.0

33

Table 3a. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Central Government Budget, 2008/09–2013/14
(In billions of Afghanis)

Revenues and grants

2008/09
Act.

2009/10
Act.

2010/11
Act.

2011/12

2012/13
Proj.

2013/14

93.6

126.4

160.4

204.4

229.3

257.3

Domestic revenues
Tax revenues
Income, profits, and capital gains
International trade and transactions
Goods and services
Other
Nontax revenues

41.4
28.8
8.2
12.8
6.3
1.5
12.6

63.5
51.5
15.6
21.8
12.3
1.8
12.0

80.4
66.4
19.4
27.7
16.3
3.0
14.0

98.8
82.1
23.7
33.8
21.0
3.6
16.7

109.0
93.0
27.1
37.6
24.2
4.1
16.0

124.1
106.2
31.0
42.0
27.9
5.2
17.9

Grants to operating budget
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF)
Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan (LOTFA)
NATO Training Mission - Afghanistan (NTM-A) and other grants

29.5
15.9
9.9
3.7

32.8
10.9
14.3
7.6

54.5
15.4
24.4
14.6

65.9
9.4
28.0
28.5

75.0
12.1
31.3
31.6

78.3
11.2
31.9
35.2

Grants to development budget
Total expenditures
Operating expenditures
Of which: Security
Wages and salaries
Of which: Security
Purchases of goods and services
Transfers, subsidies, and other
Pensions
Capital expenditures
Interest
Development expenditures
Of which:
Governance, rule of law, and human rights
Infrastructure and natural resources
Education
Health
Agriculture and rural development
Economic governance and private sector development

22.7

30.1

25.5

39.6

45.3

54.9

115.7

136.1

153.8

204.8

244.4

275.6

69.6
30.0

89.1
43.7

110.5
61.3

151.4
86.4

180.3
104.1

200.6
116.7

47.4
26.6
14.2
2.7
3.4
1.8
0.1

64.3
37.9
14.9
3.0
5.3
1.5
0.1

86.5
55.3
17.2
3.3
1.9
1.6
0.1

113.7
73.9
23.3
3.8
6.1
3.4
1.0

133.0
90.1
26.2
4.3
11.9
3.8
1.1

148.0
101.2
29.0
4.7
12.9
4.2
1.8

46.1

47.0

43.4

53.4

64.1

75.0

2.0
19.7
4.4
3.3
12.2
3.7

2.6
17.4
6.1
3.7
14.6
1.5

1.5
20.7
5.2
4.3
9.1
2.0

1.9
25.5
6.4
5.3
11.2
2.5

2.2
30.6
7.6
6.3
13.4
3.0

2.6
35.8
9.0
7.4
15.7
3.5

Operating balance including grants

1.3

7.2

24.4

13.4

3.6

1.8

Operating balance excluding grants

-28.2

-25.5

-30.1

-52.6

-71.3

-76.5

Overall budget balance including grants

-22.1

-9.7

6.5

-0.4

-15.1

-18.3

Augmented overall budget balance, including grants
Of which : Central bank capitalization

-22.1
…

-9.7
…

6.5
…

-34.5
-34.1

-11.4
3.7

-15.7
2.6

9.9
4.1

12.7
1.3

5.5
0.1

...
2.3

...
0.1

...
0.0

8.0
3.7
4.3
4.3
3.4
3.8
-0.5
0.9
…
…
…
…
…

-4.3
3.4
-7.7
-7.7
-18.8
-16.5
-2.3
11.1
…
…
…
…
…

-12.1
2.8
-14.9
-14.9
-14.9
-16.4
1.4
0.0
…
…
…
…
…

32.2
7.4
24.8
24.8
-7.5
-6.4
-1.1
32.3
37.6
-3.5
-2.6
…
…

11.3
9.3
1.9
1.9
6.0
5.1
0.9
-4.0
0.0
-3.7
-2.1
…
…

15.7
9.9
5.8
-39.3
-35.9
4.9
-40.9
-3.3
0.0
-2.6
-2.5
45.1
…

59
…
143
...
6.1
263.0

71
…
187
...
9.5
245.4

73
…
275
...
23.4
222.9

65
31.5
343
18.0
20.4
190.7

60
25.7
382
19.4
5.6
190.8

62
20.6
400
...
33.4
177.7

Float and discrepancy
Sale of nonfinancial assets 1/
Financing
External loans (net)
Domestic (net)
Central bank
Change in government deposits
Change in foreign currency deposits
Change on domestic currency deposits
Change in central bank claims on government
Of which: Central bank capitalization bond issuance
Recoveries
Amortization of central bank capitalization bond
Commercial banks 2/
Nonbank Sector
Memorandum items:
Domestic revenues as percent of operating expenditure
Central bank capitalization bond (end-of-period stock)
Security forces (National Army and Police), end of period, thousands
Indicative floor on propoor spending 3/
Discretionary cash balances 4/
External budget 5/
Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

1/ For 2011/12 and 2012/13, reflects signature bonus payments for the Aynak Copper Mine equivalents to US$53m and US$109m, respectively.
2/ By 2013/14 government will start to issue sukuk debt instruments.
3/ Propoor spending covers the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, Martyrs, and Disabled, and the Ministry of Public Health.
4/ Government deposits at the central bank exclude earmarked grants.
5/ Estimated direct productive expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the central government budget.

34

Table 3b. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Central Government Budget, 2008/09–2013/14
(In percent of GDP)
2008/09
Act.
Revenues and grants

2009/10
Act.

2010/11
Act.

2011/12

2012/13
Proj.

2013/14

17.5

20.5

22.0

23.7

23.7

24.0

Domestic revenues
Tax revenues
Income, profits, and capital gains
International trade and transactions
Goods and services
Other
Nontax revenues

7.8
5.4
1.5
2.4
1.2
0.3
2.4

10.3
8.4
2.5
3.5
2.0
0.3
2.0

11.0
9.1
2.7
3.8
2.2
0.4
1.9

11.5
9.5
2.8
3.9
2.4
0.4
1.9

11.3
9.6
2.8
3.9
2.5
0.4
1.7

11.6
9.9
2.9
3.9
2.6
0.5
1.7

Grants to operating budget
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF)
Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan (LOTFA)
NATO Training Mission - Afghanistan (NTM-A) and other grants

5.5
3.0
1.9
0.7

5.3
1.8
2.3
1.2

7.5
2.1
3.3
2.0

7.6
1.1
3.3
3.3

7.7
1.2
3.2
3.3

7.3
1.0
3.0
3.3

Grants to development budget
Total expenditures
Operating expenditures
Of which: Security
Wages and salaries
Of which: Security
Purchases of goods and services
Transfers, subsidies, and other
Pensions
Capital expenditures
Interest
Development expenditures
Of which:
Governance, rule of law, and human rights
Infrastructure and natural resources
Education
Health
Agriculture and rural development
Economic governance and private sector development

4.3

4.9

3.5

4.6

4.7

5.1

21.7

22.1

21.1

23.8

25.3

25.7

13.1
5.6

14.5
7.1

15.1
8.4

17.6
10.0

18.6
10.8

18.7
10.9

8.9
5.0
2.7
0.5
0.6
0.3
0.0

10.4
6.2
2.4
0.5
0.9
0.2
0.0

11.8
7.6
2.4
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.0

13.2
8.6
2.7
0.4
0.7
0.4
0.1

13.7
9.3
2.7
0.4
1.2
0.4
0.1

13.8
9.4
2.7
0.4
1.2
0.4
0.2

8.6

7.6

5.9

6.2

6.6

7.0

0.4
3.7
0.8
0.6
2.3
0.7

0.4
2.8
1.0
0.6
2.4
0.2

0.2
2.8
0.7
0.6
1.2
0.3

0.2
3.0
0.7
0.6
1.3
0.3

0.2
3.2
0.8
0.7
1.4
0.3

0.2
3.3
0.8
0.7
1.5
0.3

Operating balance including grants

0.2

1.2

3.3

1.6

0.4

0.2

Operating balance excluding grants

-5.3

-4.2

-4.1

-6.1

-7.4

-7.1

Overall budget balance including grants

-4.1

-1.6

0.9

0.0

-1.6

-1.7

Augmented overall budget balance, including grants
Of which : Central bank capitalization

-4.1
…

-1.6
…

0.9
…

-4.0
-4.0

-1.2
0.4

-1.5
0.2

Float and discrepancy
Sale of nonfinancial assets 1/

1.9
0.8

2.1
0.2

0.7
0.0

...
0.3

...
0.0

...
0.0

Financing
External loans (net)
Domestic (net)
Central bank
Change in government deposits
Change in central bank claims on government
Of which: Central bank capitalization bond issuance
Recoveries
Amortization of central bank capitalization bond
Commercial banks 2/
Nonbank Sector

1.5
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.2
…
…
…
…
…

-0.7
0.6
-1.3
-1.3
-3.1
1.8
…
…
…
…
…

-1.7
0.4
-2.0
-2.0
-2.0
0.0
…
…
…
…
…

3.7
0.9
2.9
2.9
-0.9
3.8
4.4
-0.4
-0.3
…
…

1.2
1.0
0.2
0.2
0.6
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
-0.2
…
…

1.5
0.9
0.5
-3.7
-3.3
-0.3
0.0
-0.2
-0.2
4.2
…

59
…
...
1.1
49.3
534

71
…
...
1.5
39.9
615

73
…
...
3.2
30.5
730

65
3.7
2.1
2.4
22.1
862

60
2.7
2.0
0.6
19.7
968

62
1.9
...
3.1
16.5
1,074

Memorandum items:
Domestic revenues as percent of operating expenditures
Central bank capitalization bond (end-of-period stock)
Indicative floor on propoor spending 3/
Discretionary cash balances 4/
External budget 5/
Nominal GDP (in billions of Afghanis)
Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

1/ For 2011/12 and 2012/13, reflects signature bonus payments for the Aynak Copper Mine equivalents to US$53m and US$109m, respectively.
2/ By 2013/14 the government will start to issue sukuk debt instruments.
3/ Propoor spending covers the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, Martyrs, and Disabled, and the Ministry of Public Health.
4/ Government deposits at the central bank exclude earmarked grants.
5/ Estimated direct productive expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the core budget.

35

Table 4a. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Central Bank Balance Sheet, 2009–2012
(at market exchange rates)
2009
Mar. 20
Act.

2010
Mar. 20
Act.

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign exchange reserves
Other foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

184.2
188.8
181.0
7.8
-4.6

194.8
209.9
204.0
5.9
-15.2

233.4
248.2
241.4
6.7
-14.8

265.4
280.8
274.2
6.6
-15.3

282.5
297.9
289.2
8.8
-15.4

288.9
305.4
296.5
8.9
-16.5

289.4
305.8
297.0
8.8
-16.4

298.1
315.6
306.5
9.1
-17.4

306.9
324.5
315.2
9.3
-17.6

315.8
334.5
324.9
9.6
-18.7

Net domestic assets
Domestic assets
Net claims on general government
Gross claims on government
Of which: Capitalization bonds
Domestic currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Other claims, of which:
Capital notes
Lender of last resort loans
Other items net

-77.9
-53.5
-31.2
4.6
...
-8.3
-27.5
-22.3
-19.3
...
-24.4

-70.3
-52.6
-36.7
15.1
...
-10.6
-41.2
-15.9
-10.9
...
-17.7

-82.4
-55.5
-48.9
14.7
...
-9.2
-54.4
-6.6
-16.1
18.1
-26.9

-99.0
-51.0
-21.3
53.1
37.8
-4.0
-70.3
-29.7
-20.5
0.0
-48.1

-114.9
-60.7
-27.2
50.8
35.4
-7.1
-70.9
-33.4
-23.9
0.0
-54.2

-122.9
-65.4
-35.1
50.3
33.9
-11.7
-73.8
-30.3
-21.3
0.0
-57.4

-110.1
-53.9
-27.2
47.8
31.5
-10.3
-64.7
-26.6
-17.7
0.0
-56.2

-122.7
-64.4
-37.7
47.4
30.0
-11.6
-73.4
-26.7
-17.8
0.0
-58.3

-121.0
-59.6
-32.6
46.1
28.6
-10.7
-68.1
-27.0
-18.0
0.0
-61.4

-120.7
-56.8
-40.2
45.7
27.1
-11.6
-74.4
-16.6
-7.6
0.0
-63.9

Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Bank deposits (Afghani denominated)

106.2
76.8
29.4

124.4
98.7
25.7

151.0
132.4
18.5

166.4
133.7
32.7

167.7
143.7
24.0

166.0
149.0
17.0

179.4
156.1
23.3

175.4
157.5
17.9

185.9
168.8
17.1

195.1
174.4
20.7

...
64.9

...
17.1

...
21.3

10.2
34.5

11.0
23.6

9.9
19.0

18.8
18.8

-2.2
5.4

3.6
10.9

8.8
17.5

...
30.4

...
28.5

...
34.2

1.0
30.8

8.5
21.4

12.5
21.3

17.8
17.8

0.9
17.8

8.2
17.5

11.7
17.0

3,591
14.5

4,209
4.3

6,257
…

6,374
…

6,510
…

2011
Mar. 20 June 21 Sep. 22
Actual

Dec. 21
Proj.

2012
Mar. 19 June 20 Sep. 21 Dec. 22
Projections

(In billions of Afghanis, unless otherwise indicated)

Memorandum items:
Reserve money
Year-to-date percentage change
Year-on-year percentage change
Currency in circulation
Year-to-date percentage change
Year-on-year percentage change

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Gross international reserves
Interest rate, 28-day capital notes (percent)

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

5,321
2.4

5,859
2.4

5,984
2.2

6,063
…

6,121
…

36
Table 4b. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Central Bank Balance Sheet, 2009–2012
(at program exchange rates) 1/
2009
Mar. 20
Act.

2010
Mar. 20
Act.

Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Foreign exchange reserves
Other foreign assets
Foreign liabilities

179.3
183.5
176.5
7.0
-4.3

196.1
210.8
205.2
5.6
-14.7

233.4
248.2
241.4
6.7
-14.8

252.8
267.6
261.2
6.4
-14.7

258.4
273.2
264.9
8.3
-14.7

261.1
276.7
268.5
8.3
-15.6

263.7
279.3
271.1
8.3
-15.6

269.2
285.7
277.3
8.4
-16.5

274.7
291.2
282.6
8.6
-16.5

280.2
297.5
288.7
8.8
-17.3

Net domestic assets
Domestic assets
Net claims on general government
Gross claims on government
Of which: Capitalization bonds
Domestic currency deposits
Foreign currency deposits
Other claims, of which:
Capital notes
Lender of last resort loans
Other items net

-73.0
-50.7
-28.6
4.2
...
-8.3
-24.5
-22.1
-19.3
...
-22.3

-71.6
-50.7
-35.1
14.7
...
-10.6
-39.1
-15.6
-10.9
...
-20.9

-82.4
-55.5
-48.9
14.7
...
-9.2
-54.4
-6.6
-16.1
18.1
-26.9

-86.4
-49.0
-19.6
52.5
37.8
-4.0
-68.1
-29.5
-20.5
0.0
-37.4

-90.7
-56.8
-23.9
50.1
35.4
-7.1
-66.8
-32.9
-23.9
0.0
-34.0

-95.1
-61.3
-31.0
49.4
33.9
-11.7
-68.7
-30.3
-21.3
0.0
-33.8

-84.4
-50.7
-24.1
47.0
31.5
-10.3
-60.8
-26.6
-17.7
0.0
-33.6

-93.8
-60.3
-33.6
46.4
30.0
-11.6
-68.4
-26.7
-17.8
0.0
-33.5

-88.8
-55.5
-28.5
45.0
28.6
-10.7
-62.8
-27.0
-18.0
0.0
-33.4

-85.1
-51.8
-35.2
44.4
27.1
-11.6
-68.1
-16.6
-7.6
0.0
-33.2

Reserve money
Currency in circulation
Bank deposits (Afghani denominated)

106.2
76.8
29.4

124.4
98.7
25.7

151.0
132.4
18.5

166.4
133.7
32.7

167.7
143.7
24.0

166.0
149.0
17.0

179.4
156.1
23.3

175.4
157.5
17.9

185.9
168.8
17.1

195.1
174.4
20.7

...
64.9

...
17.1

...
21.3

10.2
34.5

11.0
23.6

9.9
19.0

18.8
18.8

-2.2
5.4

3.6
10.9

8.8
17.5

...
30.4

...
28.5

...
34.2

1.0
30.8

8.5
21.4

12.5
21.3

17.8
17.8

0.9
17.8

8.2
17.5

11.7
17.0

3,760
3,591
14.5

4,315
4,209
4.3

5,764
6,257
…

5,881
6,374
…

5,998
6,510
…

2011
Mar. 20 June 21 Sep. 22
Actual

Dec. 21
Proj.

2012
Mar. 19 June 20 Sep. 21 Dec. 22
Projections

(In billions of Afghanis, unless otherwise indicated)

Memorandum items:
Reserve money
Year-to-date percentage change
Year-on-year percentage change
Currency in circulation
Year-to-date percentage change
Year-on-year percentage change

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
Net international reserves (at program rates)
Gross international reserves (at market rates)
Interest rate, 28-day capital notes (percent)

5,017
5,321
2.4

5,468
5,859
2.4

5,532
5,984
2.2

5,589
6,063
…

5,647
6,121
…

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Program exchange rates as of March 20, 2011 applied to evaluate foreign currency-denominated components. The Afghani per U.S. dollar rate for that
day was 45.3740.

37
Table 5. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Monetary Survey, 2008–12 1/
2008
Mar. 19
Act.

2009
Mar. 20
Act.

2010
Mar. 20
Act.

2011
Mar. 20
Act.

2012
Mar. 19
Proj.

(In billions of Afghanis)
Net foreign assets
Foreign assets
Central bank
Commercial banks
Foreign liabilities
Central bank
Commercial banks

162.2
171.5
148.0
23.6
-9.4
-5.0
-4.4

187.7
222.9
188.8
34.1
-35.2
-4.6
-30.5

225.6
257.7
209.9
47.8
-32.1
-15.2
-16.9

272.2
298.2
248.2
50.1
-26.0
-14.8
-11.3

337.2
367.2
305.8
61.3
-29.9
-16.4
-13.5

Net domestic assets
Net domestic credit
Nonfinancial public sector
Central bank
Commercial banks
Private sector 2/
Other financial institutions
Capital account
Other items net

-42.6
5.2
-33.7
-34.9
1.2
38.4
0.5
-52.5
4.8

-25.2
17.4
-32.9
-31.2
-1.7
49.8
0.5
-49.8
7.3

0.7
29.7
-39.4
-36.7
-2.7
69.7
-0.6
-57.5
28.5

5.4
31.5
-51.6
-48.9
-2.7
83.1
0.0
-23.7
-2.5

-8.9
12.3
-30.0
-27.2
-2.7
42.3
0.0
-64.3
43.2

Broad money M2
Narrow money M1
Currency outside banks
Currency in circulation
Currency held by banks
Demand deposits
Other deposits 3/

119.6
114.9
57.5
58.9
1.4
57.4
4.7

162.5
158.4
73.8
76.8
3.0
84.5
4.2

226.4
212.6
92.5
98.7
6.1
120.1
13.7

277.5
261.2
126.3
132.5
6.2
134.9
16.3

328.4
309.5
149.2
156.1
6.8
160.3
18.9

(12-month percentage change)
M2
M1
Currency outside banks
Currency in circulation
Net credit to the private sector 2/

31.0
28.7
16.0
17.0
78.3

35.9
37.8
28.4
30.4
29.8

39.3
34.3
25.3
28.5
39.7

22.6
22.8
36.5
34.2
19.3

18.3
18.5
18.2
17.8
-49.2

(In percent of GDP)
M2
M1
Memorandum items:
M2 velocity
Reserve money multiplier
Banking sector
Loan dollarization (percent)
Deposit dollarization (percent)
Currency-to-deposit ratio (percent)

27.5
26.4

30.5
29.7

36.8
34.6

38.0
35.8

38.1
35.9

4.0
1.9

3.5
1.5

3.0
1.8

2.8
1.8

2.7
1.8

75.3
79.1
94.8

73.3
58.7
86.6

74.4
67.5
73.8

73.1
65.5
87.6

77.0
66.4
87.1

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Data underlying the survey are not fully consistent because the central bank and the public banks use
the solar calendar, while commercial banks use the Gregorian calendar.
2/ The decline in 2012 reflects a write-down of bad loans in the banking sector.
3/ Comprising all claims, other than transferable deposits.

38
Table 6. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Balance of Payments, 2008/09–2013/14
2008/09

Current account (including grants)
Current account (excluding grants)
Trade balance
Exports of goods (f.o.b.) 1/
Official exports
Unofficial exports
Smuggling
Transit trade
Sales to nonresidents
Imports of goods (f.o.b.)
Services and income, net
Of which: Interest due 2/
Current transfers
Public (program grants)
Private

2009/10

2010/11
Prel.

2011/12

2012/13
Projections

2013/14

(In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated)
92
-347
267
18
-207
-536
-6,244
-6,402
-6,343
-6,293
-6,508
-6,621
-6,480
-6,354
-6,303
-6,266
-6,524
-6,672
2,465
2,517
2,836
2,908
2,651
2,560
547
476
571
657
749
836
1,918
2,041
2,265
2,251
1,902
1,724
180
141
152
157
161
162
1,438
1,400
1,463
1,444
1,291
1,263
300
500
650
650
450
300
-8,945
-8,872
-9,139
-9,174
-9,174
-9,232
-240
-370
-408
-423
-394
-372
-16
-19
-11
-12
-14
-17
6,812
6,377
6,978
6,707
6,710
6,508
6,337
6,054
6,610
6,311
6,301
6,085
475
323
368
396
409
424

Capital and financial account

338

-287

612

734

760

929

Capital account
Financial account
Debt forgiveness
Foreign direct investment
Other investment
Official loans (net)
Disbursement 3/
Amortization due 2/
Other inflows

0
338
0
300
38
96
97
-1
-57

0
-287
-1,061
303
471
286
287
-1
185

0
612
0
329
283
133
134
-1
151

0
734
0
386
348
156
158
-2
192

0
760
0
447
313
188
190
-2
125

0
929
0
604
326
194
206
-13
132

Errors and omissions (including short-term capital)

541

190

-81

-116

-78

-11

Overall balance

972

-445

797

636

475

382

-972
-993
17
17
0
5
-84
32
56
0
0

445
-621
0
0
0
1,066
0
5
1,061
442
35

-797
-797
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

-636
-653
17
18
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

-475
-506
30
36
6
0
0
0
0
0
0

-382
-404
22
36
14
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3,591
5.3
215

4,209
6.0
213

5,321
7.4
425

6,121
8.4
425

6,627
9.0
298

7,178
9.5
165

Financing
Changes in central bank's gross reserves (increase = -)
Use of Fund resources (net)
Disbursements (PRGT)
Repayments
Exceptional financing
Arrears 4/
Debt rescheduling 5/
Debt forgiveness
HIPC
MDRI
Financing gap
Memorandum items:
Gross international reserves
(Import coverage) 6/
(Relative to external debt service due)
Trade balance
Current account balance, including grants
Excluding grants

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
-61.9
-50.9
-39.6
-34.1
-33.3
0.9
-2.8
1.7
0.1
-1.1
-59.6
-51.3
-39.8
-34.3
-33.2

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excludes opium exports; includes official exports, estimates of smuggling, reexport, and sales to nonresidents.
2/ Debt service projections are based on the total stock of external debt (including estimates of unverified arrears). Interest on
overdue obligations represents estimates by Fund staff.
3/ Includes allocation of SDR 128.6 million in 2009/10.
4/ Arrears shown represent Fund staff estimates of debt service due, but not paid, on estimated overdue obligations.
5/ Debt rescheduling includes the capitalization of interest falling due to Paris Club creditors until the completion point, interim
assistance from multilateral creditors, and HIPC debt relief from multilateral creditors after the completion point.
6/ Excluding imports for reexport.

-31.7
-2.6
-31.5

39
Table 7. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Main Socioeconomic Indicators, 2000-09

Labor market
Employment-to-population ratio, (in percent, ages 15+)
Youth employment-to-population ratio, ages 15-24, (in percent)
Unemployment, total (in percent of total labor force)
Female (in percent of female labor force)
Male (in percent of male labor force)
Labor participation rate, (in percent of total population, ages 15+)
Income, inequality and poverty
Income share held by lowest 20 percent (in percent)
Income share held by highest 20 percent (in percent)
Gini index
Poverty rate (headcount at the national poverty line, in percent of population)

2000

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

54.7
42.2
…
…
…
58.9

54.2
41.7
8.5
9.5
7.6
59.3

54.9
42.6
…
…
…
59.4

54.6
42.2
…
…
…
59.6

55.5
43.3
…
…
…
59.7

54.2
41.6
…
…
…
59.8

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
33.0

…
…
…
…

…
…
…
42.0

9.0
38.7
29.4
36.0

…
…
…
…

Gender equality and empowerment
Proportion of seats held by women in the parliament (in percent)
Ratio of female to male school enrollment (in percent)
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Population, female (in percent of total)
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (in percent)

…

27.3

27.3

27.3

27.7

27.7

…
…
…
48.2
…

59.5
32.9
…
48.2
…

63.6
36.8
…
48.2
…

62.7
38.0
…
48.2
…

65.1
43.3
…
48.3
…

67.3
49.0
23.9
48.3
…

Education and health
Health expenditure (in percent of GDP)
Public health expenditure (in percent of GDP)
Public health expenditure (in percent of government spending)
Hospital beds (per 1000 people)
Life expectancy at birth (in years)
Female
Male

2.3
2.8
…
45.3
45.4
45.2

2.1
4.1
…
46.6
46.7
46.5

2.1
4.3
…
46.9
47.0
46.8

1.8
3.7
0.4
47.2
47.3
47.1

1.6
3.7
0.4
47.5
47.7
47.4

1.6
3.7
0.4
47.9
48.1
47.8

Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators (WDI) database, ILO LABORSTA database, UN MDG indicators.

40
Table 8. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan:
Proposed Schedule of Reviews and Disbursements Under New ECF Arrangement
Date

Amount of disbursement
Millions of SDRs Percent of quota 1/

Conditions

November 21, 2011

12.0

7.4

Approval of arrangement

May 20, 2012

12.0

7.4

First review and March 19, 2012
performance criteria

November 20, 2012

12.0

7.4

Second review and September 21, 2012
performance criteria

May 20, 2013

12.0

7.4

Third review and March 20, 2013
performance criteria

November 20, 2013

12.0

7.4

Fourth review and September 22, 2013
performance criteria

May 20, 2014

12.0

7.4

Fifth review and March 20, 2014
performance criteria

November 6, 2014

13.0

8.0

Sixth review and September 22, 2014
performance criteria

Total

85.0

52.5

Source: Fund staff estimates.
1/ Percentages do not add up to the total due to rounding.

41
Table 9. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan:
External Financing Requirement and Sources, 2010/11–2013/14
2010/11

2011/12
2012/13
Projections

2013/14

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
I. Total financing requirement
Current account (excluding grants)
Amortization
Of which: IMF
Prepayment of debt
Change in reserves (increase = +)
Reduction in arrears
II. Available financing
Current transfers
Foreign direct investment
Short-term private financing flows
Official medium- and long-term loans
IMF disbursements
Debt forgiveness
Debt rescheduling
Other
Financing gap

7,142

6,949

7,022

7,052

6,343
1
0
0
797
0

6,293
3
1
0
653
0

6,508
8
6
0
506
0

6,621
27
14
0
404
0

7,142

6,949

7,022

7,052

6,610
329
151
134
0
0
0
-81

6,311
386
192
158
18
0
0
-116

6,301
447
125
190
36
0
0
-78

6,085
604
132
206
36
0
0
-11

0

0

0

0

Sources: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

Table 10. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund, 2010–18

Fund obligations based on existing credit
(in millions of SDRs)
Principal
Charges and interest
Total obligations based on existing and prospective credit 1/
In millions of SDRs
In millions of U.S. dollars
In percent of Gross International Reserves
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

Net use of Fund credit (millions of SDRs)
Disbursements
Repayments and Repurchases
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Exports of goods and services (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Gross International Reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Debt service (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/
Quota (millions of SDRs)

2011

2012

2013

0.0
0.1

0.0
0.0

2.5
0.3

8.3
0.3

12.8
0.2

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
10.7
0.0
0.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.9
0.0
0.0

2.8
4.4
0.1
0.4
231
0.0
1.7

8.7
13.8
0.2
1.0
110
0.1
5.3

75
0.1
2.2
12.1
8,942
0.7
46.5

87
0.1
2.3
12.9
8,239
0.8
54.0

109
0.2
2.6
14.4
9,040
0.9
67.3

5.7
5.7
0.0

12.0
12.0
0.0

15,928
952
5,321
1.3
161.9

18,364
1,074
6,121
1.7
161.9

Sources: IMF staff estimates and projections.
1/ Includes prospective ECF disbursements of SDR 85 million (52.5 percent of quota).
2/ On accrual basis. Total debt service includes IMF repurchases and repayments.

2014
2015
Projections

2016

2017

2018

14.5
0.2

15.1
0.2

12.6
0.1

6.8
0.1

13.2
21.0
0.3
1.3
80
0.1
8.2

14.9
23.6
0.3
1.0
269
0.1
9.2

15.4
24.4
0.3
0.8
220
0.1
9.5

16.6
26.1
0.4
0.7
241
0.1
10.2

15.5
24.5
0.4
0.7
222
0.1
9.6

125
0.2
2.8
14.9
1,579
0.9
77.0

137
0.2
3.0
13.6
829
1.0
84.5

122
0.2
2.6
7.8
2,206
0.8
75.5

107
0.2
2.4
5.2
1,531
0.6
66.2

91
0.1
2.1
4.1
1,324
0.5
56.2

76
0.1
1.8
3.2
1,087
0.4
46.8

21.6
24.0
2.5

15.7
24.0
8.3

12.2
25.0
12.8

-14.5
0.0
14.5

-15.1
0.0
15.1

-16.2
0.0
16.2

-15.2
0.0
15.2

19,603
1,206
6,627
1.9
161.9

21,015
1,330
7,178
12.5
161.9

22,477
1,598
7,278
26.2
161.9

24,273
2,473
7,349
8.8
161.9

26,170
3,252
7,059
11.1
161.9

28,132
3,496
6,877
10.9
161.9

29,626
3,719
6,626
11.0
161.9

42

Outstanding Fund credit
In millions of SDRs
In billions of U.S. dollars
In percent of Gross International Reserves
In percent of exports of goods and services
In percent of debt service
In percent of GDP
In percent of quota

2010

43
APPENDIX I. ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN: LETTER OF INTENT
November 1, 2011
Ms. Christine Lagarde
Managing Director
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431

Dear Ms. Lagarde:
We would like to thank the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for its advice and support
over the last year as the government of Afghanistan and Da Afghanistan Bank dealt with the
crisis at Kabul Bank that came to the fore in September 2010 and its consequences. In
response to the crisis, we have taken important steps to mitigate its adverse effects, minimize
the fiscal costs, and safeguard good governance and the rule of law over the last 12 months.
Against this background, we entered into discussions with IMF staff on a new program that
could be supported under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF). The three-year program
through 2013/14 establishes a macroeconomic framework that will support our efforts at
economic stabilization and implementation of structural reforms. In particular, the ECF
arrangement will help us make significant progress toward a stable and sustainable
macroeconomic position, while managing the challenges of the withdrawal of the
international presence in Afghanistan, as well as strengthening the financial sector. These are
key pillars of our development strategy that aims at sustained poverty reduction. Given our
large dependence on donor support, we require external assistance to build a more resilient
and self-sustaining economic structure as well as reinforce our balance of payments position.
We hereby kindly request the approval by the Executive Board of a three- year ECF
arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 85 million (52.5 percent of Afghanistan’s
quota). To monitor progress in implementing our reform agenda, the program includes a set
of prior actions, quantitative performance criteria, indicative targets, and structural
benchmarks, outlined in the attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
(MEFP) and the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU).
The government believes that the policies set forth in the attached MEFP are adequate to
achieve the objectives of its program, but it will take any further measures that may become
appropriate for this purpose. We will consult with the Fund on the adoption of these
measures and in advance of any revision to the policies contained in the MEFP, in
accordance with the Fund’s policies on such consultation. We intend to remain in close

44
consultation with Fund staff and provide timely information necessary for monitoring
economic developments and implementation of policies under the ECF-supported program.
In addition, the government stands ready to take any further measures that might be required
to ensure that the overall objectives of the program are attained.
In line with our commitment to transparency, we hereby request that the staff report, this
letter of intent, and the attached MEFP and TMU (including all annexes and attachments), as
well as all other ECF-related documents, be published on the IMF website.
Sincerely yours,

/s/

/s/

Omar Zakhilwal
Minister of Finance

Mohibullah Safi
Acting Governor
Da Afghanistan Bank

Attachments:
Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies
Technical Memorandum of Understanding

45
ATTACHMENT I. AFGHANISTAN: MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL POLICIES
1.
This memorandum reviews recent economic developments and summarizes the
government’s economic objectives and policy framework for 2011–14, for which we are
seeking support under a new three-year arrangement with the IMF.
2.
The government of Afghanistan and Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) have made a
number of important achievements under our economic program for 2006–10. In
January 2010, we fulfilled the conditions for reaching the completion point under the Enhanced
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative, bringing together four years of important
and successful efforts despite an increasingly challenging security situation. We strengthened
basic economic institutions, made strong progress in restoring fiscal control and improving
public financial management, fostered trade and growth, and managed inflation well. Tax
collection, which was relatively weak during the first two years of the program, has improved
significantly since early-2009. We also improved the monitoring of the four largest public
enterprises, although the problems at Kabul Bank that came to the fore in the fall of 2010
highlighted the costs of weak corporate governance and the need to tackle vulnerabilities and
prevent abuse in the financial system.
3.
Looking ahead, much remains to be done. In particular, we will focus our efforts
on safeguarding financial stability, strengthening the banking system, promoting responsible
lending for investment and growth, improving the business environment for the private
sector, moving decisively toward fiscal sustainability, and improving fiscal planning and
expenditure management. We believe this will complement commitments by donors to
channel additional support through the budget and allow us to raise spending in line with our
development objectives.
I.

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

4.
Growth and inflation. Economic activity remains robust, with projected real GDP
growth of about 6 percent in 2011/12, following a growth of 8 percent in 2010/11. While
agriculture has suffered from fluctuations, growth outside agriculture has been strong due to
increased security spending and expansion of construction and trade. Inflation has increased
again owing to rising international food prices, adverse conditions in neighboring countries,
and an accommodative monetary policy. The 12-month rate of inflation peaked at 18 percent
in January-April 2011, rising from 2 percent in June 2010. It has since moderated again to
11 percent in August. During the same period, core inflation (which excludes cereals, fats,
and transportation) rose from 5 percent to 13 percent.
5.
Fiscal performance. Fiscal performance in 2010/11 remained strong. The overall
fiscal deficit including grants fell from 1.6 percent of GDP in 2009/10 to about balance in
2010/11. The improvement came mainly from a decline in development spending and a tight
control over nonsecurity spending, but also from improved domestic revenue collection

46
which was up by about 1 percent of GDP in 2010/11. Revenues in 2011/12 remain buoyant,
with a 25 percent increase in the first half over the same period in 2010/11. We continued
implementing pay and grade reforms, and recruited almost 60,000 personnel in the security
sector leading to an increase in security spending of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2010/11.
6.
Development spending. Development spending fell by 1.7 percent of GDP in
2010/11, the third year of consecutive decline. This was a result of the combined effect of
earmarked donor funding that could not be reallocated, worsening security that prevented the
execution of projects in some regions and capacity constraints at line ministries. Other
problems include ambitious multi-year spending plans (with large carry-overs), incentives for
the donors and line ministries to “front-load” the budget, difficulties with procurement
planning and execution, slow approval processes, and poor contract management. We are
addressing these issues through the Public Financial Management Road Map, which was
prepared in consultation with IMF staff. In addition, we are working closely with line
ministries to enhance their budget execution capacity and we will continue to engage with
donors to increase flexibility of funding according to their bilateral and multilateral
commitments.
7.
Fiscal reforms. We have made progress with structural reforms in the fiscal area.
First, the Medium and Large Taxpayer Offices now report directly to headquarters in Kabul
instead of to the Ministry of Finance’s provincial offices, an important measure in our goal to
create a national tax administration organized along functional lines. Second, we simplified
the chart of accounts to reduce risks associated with the implementation of program
budgeting reform. Third, with the implementation of the Afghanistan Financial Management
Information System (AFMIS) in Nuristan in 2010, we completed the AFMIS roll-out across
the country. This is a significant achievement, which provides timely information on budget
expenditures and subjects them to a high degree of fiduciary control. Fourth, the
implementation of the Automated System of Customs Data at the Nimroz customs post has
begun. A business model for border controls in line with best practice (a critical measure to
fight corruption at customs) was introduced in September 2011 at the Hairatan Border
Crossing Post. The model envisages the presence of only two ministries at the border
(Interior and Finance). Following successful implementation of the pilot, the model will be
rolled out to additional border crossing posts by end-March 2012.
8.
Public enterprises. Financial reviews and business plans by four key public
enterprises―Ariana (an airline), Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS, a power utility),


In addition, we had the largest positive increase in Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
scores of any country with two assessments. We remain committed to increases in budget transparency.
Although still low in absolute terms, we had a 160 percent increase in our Open Budget Index score from 8 to
21 percent and have committed to at least 30 percent in the next review.

47
Afghan Telecom, and The Afghanistan Fuel and Liquid Gas Enterprise (FLGE)―were
finalized in 2010. The financial reviews revealed a number of shortcomings, such as a lack of
management and financial reporting systems in the companies, over-staffing (Ariana), lack of
competitiveness (Ariana, Afghan Telecom, FLGE), collection problems (DABS), and serious
corporate governance issues (FLGE). The business and restructuring plans that are now being
implemented address these deficiencies.
9.
Financial sector and Kabul Bank. Over the past four years, the central bank has
strengthened its capacity for banking supervision. Still, the rapid growth of the banking
sector proved challenging as illustrated by the Kabul Bank crisis that came to the fore in the
fall of 2010. In August/September 2010, due to concerns over operation of Kabul Bank, the
largest commercial bank, we removed the two major shareholders from management, put the
bank into conservatorship and suspended shareholder rights. However, public concern over
its stability caused a run on the bank. With one-third of the system’s assets of US$4 billion,
the run threatened the stability of the whole banking system. In order to prevent further
instability we promptly announced that its deposits would be guaranteed. This action
contained the run and prevented contagion. Nonetheless, Kabul Bank lost about one-half of
its deposits and the central bank had to extend a lender-of-last-resort (LoLR) facility for
US$825 million. Subsequently, Kabul Bank was put into receivership, revoking
shareholders’ rights altogether. Its deposits and good assets were transferred to a
bridgebank―New Kabul Bank―which is being prepared for sale. It was established that
about US$865 million (principal and interest) in the asset portfolio of the bank are
questionable.
10.
Monetary developments. We responded to the initial run at Kabul Bank in
September 2010 with sufficient cash notes to repay depositors. At the same time, by
sterilizing the impact of the LoLR loan to Kabul Bank with a fraction of our foreign reserves,
we prevented the bank’s crisis from destabilizing the exchange rate. The interest rate on
28-day capital notes remained at around 3 percent. However, monetary aggregates grew by
more than envisaged, mainly reflecting the increased preference for cash by the public in the
aftermath of the Kabul Bank crisis, but also high aid inflows.
11.
External current account. The external current account balance was favorable,
facilitating a further buildup of international reserves to about 7 months of imports. After
reaching the HIPC completion point in 2010, we are following up with Paris Club creditors on



At Ariana, the ministry of finance-appointed implementation team has installed a new chief financial officer,
the amendments of the charter of the company is in process, and an advisor was recruited to work on
maintenance, safety, and quality assurance. In the past year, DABS has improved revenue collection and
introduced a procurement manual and new human resources’ procedures. Afghan Telecom has been expanding
its capacity. As for FLGE, the company no longer enjoys an effective monopoly on fuel storage.

48
their debt relief commitments, and carrying out negotiations with other creditors on
comparable terms.
12.
Structural reforms. While there were delays in the implementation of the structural
measures agreed under the previous program for implementation by March 2010, all but one of
those measures have been implemented (Table 1). The pending benchmark on the protocol for
border controls is being carried over to the new program.
II.

THE ECONOMIC PROGRAM FOR 2012–14

13.
The program. Our three-year economic program is a key component of the
government’s development strategy going forward. It is an integral part of the comprehensive
framework for security, development, and governance presented at the Kabul Conference in
July 2010 and it establishes the economic parameters for Afghanistan’s transition, which is to
be agreed at the Bonn Conference in December 2011. Within this broader development agenda,
the program aims at consolidating the gains achieved so far and invigorating reforms to foster
growth and poverty reduction. To this end, the key objectives of the program will be to:
(i) make significant progress toward a stable and sustainable macroeconomic position while
managing the challenges of the withdrawal of the international presence in Afghanistan;
(ii) strengthen the banking system and address the governance and accountability issues
highlighted by the Kabul Bank crisis; (iii) move toward fiscal sustainability; and (iv) improve
the transparency and efficiency of public spending and services to protect the poor. We will
pursue policies to keep inflation low, improve banking supervision and financial integrity,
amend the banking law, and strengthen the framework to deal with financial crime. In addition,
we intend to achieve sustained increases in domestic revenues (with proper focus on the
extractive industries sector), prioritize public spending and improve expenditure management,
and reduce fiscal risks from public enterprises.
14.
Macroeconomic outlook. Despite an expected decline in overall donor assistance,
our goal is to sustain annual real GDP growth at about 6–7 percent over the next three years,
supported by an expansion in the nonagricultural sector and mining investment. Cognizant of
the negative effects of inflation, particularly on the poor, and in line with our goal to protect
vulnerable segments of our population, we will strive to bring inflation down. Sustained
donor funding and a stable economy will support the balance of payments. We intend to keep
international reserves at around 7 months of imports.



A 100 percent debt forgiveness agreement with the United States in the amount of US$109 million came into
effect in September 2010, and we signed a final debt forgiveness agreement with Germany in the amount of
US$17 million in January 2011. Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Croatia also provided 100 percent debt relief. We are
still discussing debt restructuring and relief with Non-Paris Club creditors, namely Bulgaria, Iran, Kuwait and
OPEC.

49
15.
Prioritizing development spending. In early 2010, we developed the cluster
approach to better prioritize the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS) and
improve coordination and implementation. We grouped line ministries in six clusters
(security, governance, infrastructure, agriculture and rural development, human resource
development and private sector development) that focus on the delivery of selected largescale national priority programs which, combined, account for over 80 percent of the
development budget through 2013/14. We are also taking steps to address bottlenecks in the
execution of the development budget. The objective is twofold: for the government to
improve the delivery of services; and for donors to align development assistance with our
national priorities and channel more resources through the budget. The government believes
that improvements in governance will give donors the confidence to increase the proportion
of these funds channel through the budget, and we have steadily implemented Kabul
conference commitments on governance and corruption and maintain a matrix of
achievements.
16.
Poverty reduction. Our policies are guided by the ANDS and based on low inflation,
propoor budgeting, and economic growth. Although it will be necessary to allocate
increasing amounts of spending to security, we will also allocate adequate resources to help
the poor. To monitor results, we will improve the collection and analysis of poverty
indicators. In 2011/12, we will update the ANDS poverty profile using the 2007/08 National
Risk and Vulnerability Assessment as a baseline, and integrate the allocation and tracking of
propoor outlays into the budget process. Based on the existing poverty profile, propoor
operating spending in the 2011/12 budget is programmed to be about Af 16.3 billion
(25 percent of nonsecurity operating spending) compared with Af 13.6 billion in
2010/11 (25 percent of nonsecurity operating spending) (indicative target).
A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy
17.
Low inflation, an exchange rate regime capable of absorbing shocks to the
economy, and effective coordination of monetary and fiscal policies are key ingredients
for macroeconomic stability. To this end, we will continue to promote price stability,
strengthen monetary policy operations, and improve coordination between the central bank and
the ministry of finance.
18.
Monetary and exchange rate policies. Monetary policy will aim to lower core
inflation to about 4 to 6 percent, while still recognizing that many drivers of inflation are


The cluster process is not a new strategy for development nor does it substitute the budget process. It is a way
to better prioritize activities for the purposes of budget planning, with an emphasis on improving governance,
job creation and the delivery of public services.



Separately, we also estimate that around 45 percent of the development budget is propoor spending, but this
will not be yet included in the program because of uncertain execution rates.

50
external and beyond our control. To this end, we will regularly monitor leading indicators of
inflation, including monetary aggregates and headline inflation, to steer monetary policy. We
will maintain a floating exchange rate system that will allow the rate to reflect market
fundamentals, while intervention will aim at smoothing out volatility and achieving our
international reserves targets. We remain committed to an independent central bank that sets
monetary policy with a view to maintaining low inflation and managing shocks or persistent
changes in foreign exchange inflows without overburdening fiscal policy.
19.
Monetary program. In line with improved operational capacity at the central bank, we
switched in 2010 to reserve money targeting. Given our estimate for money demand growth
and the recent rise in inflation, we target reserve money growth of 19 percent during 2011/12.
We also intend to slow the growth of currency in circulation from 34 percent in 2010/11 to
18 percent in 2011/12.
20.
Foreign exchange risk. We will adopt measures to reduce the central bank’s
exposure to foreign exchange risk. Currently, large foreign currency inflows from coalition
forces are converted to Afghanis by the central bank. These inflows remain in a dollar
account, except for an appropriate working balance in Afghanis. We will move towards a
system in which foreign currency will be exchanged on an open market, with sales to the
central bank as a last recourse. To this end, the central bank has been reducing its role in
providing currency through foreign exchange auctions by raising minimum bid amounts in
these auctions and charging service fees for cash transactions.
21.
Monetary operations. By January 2012, we will restore the averaging of required
reserves that was in effect before the introduction of the blocked account system. This will
facilitate banks’ liquidity management, stabilize interbank rates, and foster the development
of the interbank market. We will also increase the stock of the central bank’s capital notes to
facilitate monetary policy implementation and to enable open market operations. To prevent
the capital note market from being dominated by a few participants, we have introduced a
percentage ceiling on the amount of capital notes that a successful bidder can obtain.
22.
Ministry of finance and central bank coordination. The cost of monetary policy
over the past few years has negatively affected the equity of the central bank. This has
highlighted the need to implement the framework for central bank capitalization in a manner
that ensures autonomy of the central bank, safeguards its resources, adheres to international
accounting standards and best practices, and is fiscally sustainable. To this end, the ministry
of finance and the central bank will reach agreement by December 2011 on the central bank’s
capital requirements and its calculations, possible amendments to the central bank law, and
modalities for addressing the central bank’s capital shortfalls or surpluses. Subsequently, the
ministry of finance will recapitalize the central bank as required. To strengthen the conduct
of monetary policy, facilitate public fiscal cash management, and promote market
development we will finalize legislation—with timely IMF assistance—to set up a sukuk

51
(Sharia compliant treasury bill) market with a view to submit the bill for parliamentary
approval by September 2012.
B. Financial Sector
23.
We have designed and started implementing a comprehensive strategy to
strengthen the banking system, to lower fiscal costs associated with Kabul Bank’s
failure, and to address governance issues (Table 3). This strategy, outlined in the attached
action plan, includes resolving Kabul Bank, drawing lessons from its failure, promoting
transparency, governance and the framework for protecting the financial system from
economic crime, as well as addressing moral hazard, and strengthening banking supervision,
and safeguarding a financial system based on integrity and the rule of law.
24.
Resolution of Kabul Bank. We are proceeding to resolve Kabul Bank to lower fiscal
costs and protect the banking system. The bank has been put under receivership and its
license has been revoked. Shareholders’ rights, including ownership rights, have been
extinguished. Moreover, shareholders that have been found not fit and proper according to
the banking law and central bank regulations will be banned from future ownership of any
bank in Afghanistan. The bad assets of Kabul Bank (along with the US$825 million LoLR
liability) remain with the receiver, which, with the help of an asset management specialist,
will continue to effectively pursue their recovery domestically and internationally through all
available legal, regulatory, and administrative means, in accordance with Afghan law and
relevant international treaties. A bridge bank was established by transferring to it Kabul
Bank's remaining deposit liabilities of US$633 million, remaining good assets of about
US$208 million (consisting of physical assets and the remainder from the first LoLR loan) as
well as US$425 million of new financing (funded by a second LoLR loan of that amount
extended to Kabul Bank before its receivership). The bridge bank, New Kabul Bank, will be
put up for sale by June 2012. The sale will be conducted in a fully transparent manner, and
only “fit and proper” qualified applicants will be considered. If the sale does not materialize,
the bank will be downsized and merged into other financial institutions or liquidated by
March 2013. A share of salary and other payment services will be migrated to other banks to
allow government employees a choice of bank starting in 2012. In case privatization fails, the
migration would be accelerated in line with the objective of merging or liquidating the bank
by March 2013. The receiver and New Kabul Bank will produce monthly reports including
management accounts to allow the ministry of finance and the supervisor to monitor their
financial performance.
25.
Financing of Kabul Bank’s insolvency. To compensate the central bank for the
costs of resolving Kabul Bank, the ministry of finance issued a zero-coupon government
bond with net present value of Af 37.6 billion (equivalent to US$825 million), taking over
DAB’s lender of last resort claim on Kabul Bank. The bond has an 8-year maturity and a
quarterly increasing amortization schedule. It will yield a regular flow of payments to the
central bank and allow the government to honor this obligation with fiscal resources. The

52
characteristics of this zero-coupon bond are equivalent to a financial instrument with a two
percent yield. The first amortization installment will be paid immediately after the financing
has been approved by parliament. In addition, over time, the amounts recovered from Kabul
Bank’s impaired assets will be paid to the central bank and reduce the outstanding amount of
the bond. Request for payment of the first year’s installment of US$73 million through the
national budget was initially rejected by parliament because parliamentarians wanted to
better understand the issue. After a period of engaging with parliament, a bill was
resubmitted to parliament for a payment of US$51 million, with the remaining
US$22 million having been transferred to the central bank from the receiver out of asset
recoveries. The bill was approved by parliament on October 15, 2011, and the government
made the payment on October 24, 2011.
26.
Moral hazard. Governance problems and fraud are the causes of Kabul Bank’s
failure. The government is investigating and will prosecute any criminal acts related to the
bank’s failure and will pursue maximum asset recovery using all appropriate legal and
regulatory mechanisms. To this end, we have implemented a strategy for prosecution of
crimes committed at Kabul Bank and a prosecutorial team has been formed in the Attorney
General’s Office, equipped with the necessary mandate, expertise and resources. Evidence of
wrongdoing at Kabul Bank has been and continues to be referred to law enforcement
authorities according to the Afghan law. Lastly, in order to promote stability in the financial
sector, in cooperation with development partners, we will prepare by March 2012 a roadmap
with a medium-term strategy to build capacity and strengthen the institutional framework to
deal promptly and effectively with economic crime.
27.
Asset Recovery. An audit is expected to be completed by end-March 2012 to
establish the financial liabilities of the shareholders and provide the basis maximum asset
recovery (below); the auditor has requested some additional time compared to our earlier
understandings because the analysis of the group loans is taking longer than expected. We
received the interim report for Kabul Bank on September 20, 2011 and shared it subsequently
with IMF staff. The interim report for Azizi Bank is expected for November and will also be
shared with staff. As criminal investigations into Kabul Bank have commenced, the legal
system will be used to facilitate asset recovery domestically and internationally, including
through the use of relevant international treaties and mutual legal assistance provisions.
To date, asset recovery efforts resulted in US$75 million recovered in cash––including from
performing loans, under legally binding agreements with cooperating shareholders and
related parties, and outside such agreements––along with physical assets available for sale
valued at about US$153 million, and we are working to make further progress on asset
recovery in the coming weeks. We have also initiated legal proceedings, including in the
field of asset recovery, where appropriate and where shareholders were not cooperating. We
have requested training in asset recovery and are tasking an audit firm currently working in
Kabul to advise on how to make asset recovery more effective, both domestically and
internationally.

53

28.
Transparency and accountability. DAB issued a written public statement
explaining the events leading to the collapse of Kabul Bank, the action taken, and the
envisaged resolution strategy; the statement was posted on DAB’s website
(http://www.centralbank.gov.af/) in May 2011. In addition, to draw on the lessons from the
collapse of Kabul Bank, the ministry of finance and DAB have referred the case to the
independent Monitoring and Evaluation Committee (which was set up as part of the Kabul
Process) to conduct an in-depth public inquiry. This inquiry will examine the events leading
to the Kabul Bank crisis, starting with the inception of the bank, and look into the operations
of the bank, activities of its shareholders, the role of supervisory and auditing bodies, and the
subsequent effectiveness of the government and the criminal justice system in dealing with
any crimes committed. The final report will be published by September 2012.
29.
Identifying vulnerabilities. We have started audits by internationally reputable audit
firms of all banks in the system with a CAMEL (Capital, Asset Quality, Management,
Profitability, and Liquidity) rating of 3 or worse, beginning with systemically important
banks. The terms of reference for the audits of Kabul Bank and Azizi Bank have been agreed
with the IMF. For Kabul Bank, the aim is to document accounting irregularities and possible
crimes, such as fraud and money laundering – the results will also serve to support
prosecution and asset recovery. For Azizi Bank, the audit is expected to identify potential
problem areas and help develop additional corrective measures if needed―ultimately
contributing to strengthening banking supervision. We are committed to having the audits
finalized by end-March 2012.
30.
Banking supervision. To improve banking soundness, the central bank is stepping up
monitoring of banks and enforcing previous supervisory orders. Our approach to
strengthening supervision began with a detailed “lessons learned from Kabul Bank”
operational strategy to strengthen supervision. In addition, the central bank established an
interdepartmental committee to review compliance with regulations by banks and issued
supervisory orders to all banks with weak CAMEL ratings regarding corrective actions
previously recommended. The committee is responsible for monitoring enforcement orders
and imposing sanctions for noncompliance (e.g., fines, suspension of profit distribution,
restriction on bank branching or lending, conservatorship, and bankruptcy), and monitoring
enforcement orders and supervisory measures, including on AML/CFT recommendations.
We are also working to improve capacity for off-site supervision that has been lagging. We
also seek to restore the capacity and effectiveness of the banking supervision department that
have been weakened, including because some staff moved to the receiver.
31.
Regulatory framework. We have reinforced the governance framework for banks.
The central bank has published a circular clarifying the criteria that banks’ shareholders and
managers must meet in order to be “fit and proper.” In addition, we have fully enforced a

54
circular meant to prevent conflict of interests and governance issues that arise when
shareholders hold management positions.
32.
Legal framework. We intend to improve governance in the banking system by
strengthening the banking law and encouraging consolidation through higher capital
requirements. We will finalize a replacement or amendments to the banking law by endMarch 2012 with a view to strengthening provisions on corporate governance, capital, large
exposures, related parties, consolidated supervision, early intervention, enforcement, and
bank resolution. We will submit the law or the amendments to parliament by September
2012. We have already started reviewing the existing central bank regulation in light of these
changes to speed up their implementation once they become law. To strengthen the banking
system’s capacity to absorb losses and encourage consolidation of small banks, we have
doubled the minimum capital requirement to US$20 million and the central bank will request
a recapitalization plan for the banks that have not been able to increase their capital to the
new ratio by September 2012 while encouraging them to consider merging with another
bank. In addition, a moratorium on increasing the number of banking licenses is in place.
33.
AML/CFT. Cognizant of the threat that corruption, drug trafficking, and the
financing of terrorism poses to our financial system and our security, we will strengthen our
AML/CFT regime by implementing an action plan based on the recommendations of the
February 2011 assessment. To this end we will submit to parliament amendments to our
AML/CFT legislation as necessary, strengthen the capacity of the financial intelligence unit
(FinTRACA), publish its annual report, implement (by enforcement where there is electricity
and security and by encouragement in areas where there is not) the reporting arrangements
for money service providers (MSPs) via dedicated software. This year we have strengthened
our AML/CFT regime by increasing the intensity of the training FinTRACA gives to
financial sector compliance officers, we have completed the registration of roughly
80 percent of the MSPs outside of Helmand and Kandahar, we have encouraged the use of
dedicated reporting software for all MSPs, and we have issued terms of references for
AML/CFT interagency coordinating bodies (at the working and high level).



Corporate governance and consolidated supervision amendments are intended to address weaknesses that
leave the banking sector vulnerable, including risks from mismanagement and bad accounting. Amendments
related to the enforcement of supervision orders are being put forward to increase the efficacy of bank
supervision and legal implementation, while amendments regarding problem bank resolution are designed to
limit the costs to the government and damage to the financial sector in the event of bank failure.



The financial intelligence unit of the central bank will also continue training counterpart institutions in
AML/CFT regime implementation, including the filing of suspicious transaction reports.

55
C. Fiscal Policy and Governance
34.
Going forward, our objectives in the fiscal area are to achieve sustained
increases in revenue collection, a gradual takeover of externally-financed operating
spending, and an expenditure allocation consistent with ANDS priorities in line with
improvements in public expenditure management, fiscal policy formulation, and
accountability in public enterprises. To this end, the program envisages actions to broaden
the tax base, deepen tax and customs reforms, strengthen budget processes, program
budgeting, and the Medium-Term Fiscal Framework, and increase transparency, governance
and efficiency in public enterprises (Table 2).
35.
We will take further steps to move toward fiscal sustainability. Fiscal
sustainability will depend on sustained increases in revenues together with prioritized
spending reflecting development and security priorities. The program envisages an increase
in domestic revenues of 0.6 percent of GDP in the next three years. Looking beyond the
program period, the planned introduction of a VAT in March 2014 is expected to raise an
additional 2 percent of GDP, and we are aiming for a revenue-to-GDP ratio of about
16 percent of GDP by 2017/18.
36.
Expenditures. On the spending side, the baseline scenario projects an increase in the
size of security forces (national army and police) from 275,000 in March 2011 to a planned
maximum of 400,000 by April 2014. In 2011/12, wages will increase by 1.4 percent of GDP,
of which security accounts for 1 percent of GDP. We plan to continue reforms in education,
the civil service and other ANDS priorities. Other spending pressures, emanating from the
security transition and the gradual takeover of operations and maintenance of capital projects,
will lead to an increase of 0.8 percent of GDP in nonsecurity spending as a share of GDP.
Development spending is projected to increase by 0.3 percent of GDP. Given the agreement
with donors to gradually phase out ARTF grants to the operating budget by US$25 million
per year, we will increase the domestic financing of the operating budget accordingly. The
large increase in security spending in nominal terms means that the share of operating
spending financed by domestic revenues is expected to first increase and then fall in the third
year.
37.
Tax administration. Our goal is to further increase the efficiency and equity of tax
collection. To this end, we intend to implement additional measures to strengthen the medium
and large taxpayers’ offices (MTOs and LTOs) including the consistent application of these
offices’ selection criteria. In addition, the Standard Integrated Government Tax Administration
System was implemented in July in the LTO, allowing for automated collection systems.
Lastly, specialized units will be created in the Revenue and Customs departments to use


Security forces will increase by 60,000 in 2011/12

56
budgets strategically and in a manner consistent with reform plans. These units will report
directly to the Directors of Revenue and Customs and will be in charge of budgeting,
procurement, personnel planning, and monitoring budget execution.
38.
Customs administration. In September we started implementing a new business
model of border control at the Hairatan customs post in line with best practice. The new
model envisages only two agencies at the border (Afghan Customs Department and Afghan
Border Police), streamlining the number of agencies involved to improve collections and
reduce opportunities for corruption. We will roll out this new business model to two
additional border posts March 2012—three if the security situation permits. In addition, we
will move forward with post-clearance audits and set up risk management approaches to
cargo verification by June 2012. These two reforms will limit interaction between taxpayers
and customs officials thus facilitating trade, improving efficiency, and reducing opportunities
for corruption.
39.
Tax policy. We will initiate a major tax policy reform centered on the introduction of
a VAT by March 2014, with the aim of broadening the tax base significantly and achieving
our long-term goal of raising revenue-to-GDP ratio to levels comparable with similar
countries. We will move forward with the VAT legislation by preparing an implementation
plan with support by IMF staff, sending a draft law to the Ministry of Justice (“Taqnin”) for
review by end-December 2011, and submitting the law for parliamentary approval by endDecember 2012. Lastly, we will set up an effective and transparent fiscal regime for mining,
and seek full compliance with the Extractive Industries Transparencies Initiative (EITI) by
September 2012.
40.
Public financial management. We plan to strengthen our public financial
management systems with a view to ensuring that (i) policies reflect social needs; (ii) the
budget is used to assign responsibilities for development outcomes, (iii) resources are
allocated in an efficient manner; and (iv) officials are accountable and services are delivered
with a focus on helping the poor. In this connection, donors signaled their willingness to
increase the share of development aid delivered through the budget over the next few years,
including through multi-donor trust funds. For our part, we will implement the Public
Financial Management Road Map with priority reforms in budget preparation, budget
execution, and transparency and accountability.
41.
Budget presentation and execution. We will improve the capacity and involvement
of provincial authorities in budget planning and project implementation, reduce procurement


Afghanistan became an EITI candidate country in February 2010. In addition to the four sign-up criteria that
were met to achieve EITI candidate status, the Afghanistan EITI (AEITI) Multi-Stakeholders Group and
National Secretariat have been established to run and oversee EITI implementation. Currently AEITI
stakeholders are undertaking EITI training and capacity building activities.

57
delays by ensuring that key line ministries adhere to the revised legal framework, and
incorporate financial and nonfinancial performance targets in budget submissions. We will
also improve financial planning and reporting, including reports on the financial operations
of the general government (extra-budgetary agencies, municipalities, and estimated
disbursements by donors through the “external” budget).
42.
Transparency and accountability. To increase the transparency and accountability of
public spending, we will continue to implement Article 61 of the Public Finance Expenditure
Management Law. The Internal Audit Department of the Ministry of Finance performed audits
on four key line ministries in the past year. We will audit 10 additional line ministries in
2011/12. External audits will be enhanced by strengthening the independence of the Control
and Audit Office under a new audit law which was submitted to parliament on May 10, 2011.
43.
Governance. To improve governance and strengthen anti-corruption measures, we
have established an Anti-Corruption Unit in the Attorney General’s Office and the AntiCorruption Court within the Supreme Court, enhancing our ability to investigate and
prosecute corruption-related offenses. We also adopted a detailed “strategy and policy for
anti-corruption and administrative reform,” and have ratified the United Nations Convention
against Corruption in August 2008. In July 2008, the President issued a Decree establishing a
High Office for Oversight and Anti-Corruption (HOO) as the highest office for the
coordination and monitoring of the implementation of Afghanistan’s anti-corruption strategy
and for the implementation of administrative procedural reform in the country. Despite
delays including some beyond government control, an independent Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee was inaugurated on May 11, 2011.
44.
Program budgeting. We will continue the program budgeting reform by creating a
simple results framework directly linked to line ministries’ performance indicators, as defined
in the ministries’ budget submissions. This will allow linking public spending to intended
results and increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of spending (particularly propoor
spending). Furthermore, we have introduced in the 2011/12 budget a common presentation of
the operating and development budgets across all budgetary units. Parliamentary
appropriations on a program basis will take place in subsequent years after sufficient progress
is achieved. During this year, we will also develop and implement a communication strategy to
explain this reform to key stakeholders.
45.
Medium-Term Fiscal Framework. We have been strengthening our medium-term
fiscal framework by preparing short- and medium-term policy trade-offs and financing
constraints to make it a more effective tool for fiscal policy formulation. Going forward, we
plan to (i) improve revenue projections through sensitivity analysis and plausible
macroeconomic assumptions; (ii) incorporate line ministries’ estimates of future spending; and
(iii) improve the analysis of security spending. Ultimately, our objective is to move toward a

58
medium-term budget framework including projections of spending by line ministries in line
with the priorities of a multi-year framework.
46.
Public enterprises. We are taking steps to strengthen the financial oversight of
public enterprises to contain fiscal risks, reduce opportunities for corruption, and foster
reforms; and will seek donor assistance to build capacity. We are ensuring the
implementation of the restructuring and business plans of the four large public enterprises.
Specific actions include finalizing HR reforms at Ariana by June2012, ensuring a continued
reduction of subsidies for DABS, and developing a timebound plan by June 2012 for the
reform and rationalization of FLGE into a commercial entity—including an asset inventory
and audited financial statements—that does not require any subsidies or special treatment,
and discontinue its current monopoly and unauthorized collection of fees. Finally, we will
strengthen capacity at the Department of State-Owned Enterprises and, by end March 2012,
submit to the Ministry of Justice changes to the legal framework governing public enterprises
that will bring such entities under ownership and effective control of the Ministry of Finance.
D. Program Modalities and Monitoring
47.
We will continue monitoring our reform agenda through our Technical
Coordination Committee (TCC). The first year of the new three-year economic program to
be supported by the ECF arrangement will be monitored through quantitative performance
criteria for March and September 2012, indicative targets for December 2011 and June 2012;
as well as selected structural benchmarks. The first and second reviews of the program could
be completed in May 31, 2012 and November 30, 2012, respectively. The central bank will
work with IMF staff to ensure timely completion of the update safeguards assessment and is
committed to implementing its recommendations thereafter. Quantitative targets and
structural measures are specified in Tables 4–5 and defined as needed in the attached
Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU).
48.
During the program period, we will not impose or intensify restrictions on the
making of payments and transfers for current international transactions, or introduce
or modify multiple currency practices, or conclude bilateral payments agreements
inconsistent with Article VIII, or impose or intensify restrictions for balance of
payments purposes.

59
Table 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Structural Benchmarks for the
Seventh Review of the ECF Arrangement, December 2009-March 2010
Target Date

Status as of
September 25, 2010

Begin publication of four-month reports and
forecasts for financial flows and other key variables
for Da Afghanistan Breshna Moassessa/Sherkat
(DABM/S).

Dec. 31, 2009

Delayed. Implemented
in July 2010. Most data
were provided in March
2010 and the remaining
data were submitted in
July 2010.

Finalize a comprehensive review of the financial
situation of Afghan Telecom, ARIANA, DABS, and
the Liquid Fuel and Gas Enterprise (FLGE) and their
fiscal relations with the government in terms of tax
owed, subsidies (if applicable), and other payables
or receivables. The review will include regularization
of tax payments and other cross debts and
reduction of subsidies (if applicable); closure of
unauthorized bank accounts; review of corporate
governance procedures; business plans; and plans
for divestiture, restructuring, of privatization for
these enterprises.

Mar. 30, 2010

Partially delayed.
Review of all SOEs
(except FLGE) was
implemented by March
2010. The review of
FLGE was completed in
October 2010.

Transfer the directorate responsible for monitoring
and managing public enterprises in the MOF from
the Administration Department to the Finance
Department or the Office of the Minister.

Feb. 28, 2010

Delayed. Implemented
in April 2010.

Adopt and implement the business model of border
controls clarifying the role of each ministry at the
border consistent with internationally accepted best
practices in consultation with other stakeholders
(Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Ministry of
the Interior) for better customs controls at the
border.

Feb. 28, 2010

Not implemented. The
delay is due to
difficulties in clarifying
the roles of various
ministries and ensuring
good governance.
Measure has been
reformulated and
included in the program
to be supported under
the new ECF
arrangement.

Implement the Automated System for Customs Data
(ASYCUDA) transit module along Zaranj-Nimroz
axis and declaration processing module at Nimroz.

Mar. 30, 2010

Delayed. Implemented
in June 2010.

60
Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Fiscal Measures
Measure

Timing

1. Tax Policy
VAT
a) Finalize a VAT implementation plan;

End-December
2011

b) Submit VAT legislation to Ministry of Justice’s Taqnin;

End-December
2011

c) Submit VAT legislation to Parliament following Cabinet approval;

End- December
2012

d) Begin implementation of VAT.

End-March
2014

Mining
a) Review the consistency of mining and tax laws;

End-November
2011

b) Develop MoF's capacity for medium-term projections of mining-related
revenue;

End-March
2012

c) Ensure a transparent mechanism for licensing, contracting, and collecting
taxes, royalties, and fees;

End-March
2012

d) Prepare a medium- to long-term strategy to restructure and corporatize public
enterprises in the mining sector.

End-March
2012

2. Tax and Customs Administration
Resourcing
Specialized units will be created at ARD and ACD to enhance their capacity to use
budgets strategically and consistently with reform plans. These units will report directly
to the Director General of Revenue and the Director General of Customs and will be in
charge of budgeting, procurement, personnel planning, and monitoring budget
execution.

End-March
2012

Implement SIGTAS in the LTO

Completed

Establish pilot of a Border Management Model at Hairatan Border Crossing Point
(BCP), based on a ‘two-agency’ approach which restricts border presence to the
Afghan Border Police (ABP) and the Afghan Customs Department (ACD). Under this
model, the ABP will continue to fulfill immigration and security responsibilities, with
ACD fulfilling all other commercial and trade-related duties.

Completed

Border Management Model to be rolled out to at least two additional Border Crossing
Points—three if the security situation permits.

End-March
2012

Improve post-clearance audits by improving the unit resources and introducing risk
management.

End-March
2012

61
Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Fiscal Measures
Measure

Timing

Finalize (End-September 2011) and approve (End-December 2011) the new
organizational structure of ACD along best international practices in consultation with
IMF staff.

End-December
2011

Introduce risk management to cargo verification.

End-June 2012

3. Budget and Treasury Departments – PFM Roadmap
Program budgeting
Prepare a single common program-based budget presentation integrating the
operating and development budgets across all budgetary units. For Budget Statement
purposes, submit to the Cabinet and Parliament a program-based presentation, along
with the traditional line-budget basis presentation until such time as appropriations are
done on a program basis (not to happen until, at least, 1392).

Completed

MoF develops and implements a communication strategy consistent with commitments
under the PFM roadmap.

Implementation
underway.

Conduct a full review before a decision is made to transition to program based
appropriations, which is unlikely before the 1392 Budget at the earliest.

End-September
2012

FPU
Start developing a tax policy capacity at the FPU in line with IMF staff
recommendations.

End-December
2011

Enhance the MTFF and other budget documents by:
a. Analyzing explicitly the medium-term security related operating spending,
including various assumptions, to assess the impact on the resource
envelope available for non-security spending;

End-December
2011

b. Including robust extractive industry revenue projections;

End-March
2012

c.

Ongoing

Updating projections of existing and new major fiscal pressures;

d. Costing fiscal pressures of new reforms.

Ongoing

Budget execution and fiscal reporting
Enhance AFMIS functionality to meet the requirement for commitment control of all
commitments approved by the Special Procurement Committee based on allotments
issued.

Completed

Prepare financial plans for the Ministries of Interior and Defense taking into account
their procurement plans. Annual allotments with monthly breakdown based on these
financial plans will be issued on a pilot basis for operating budget expenditures for the
rest of the year. Based on a successful implementation for these two ministries, we
intend to extend this pilot to as many ministries as possible during the next fiscal year,
2012/13.

End-November
2011

62
Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Fiscal Measures (Concluded)
Measure
Issue 2001 GFSM-based biannual reports on the financial operations of the general
government, including extra-budgetary agencies, and estimated disbursements by
donors through the External Budget (based on information provided by donors). For
municipalities, the reports will be annual. The reports will be quarterly for the centre
after a year and remain biannual for the remainder.

Timing
TBD

4. Audit
Internal audit
The Internal Audit Department of the Ministry of Finance will perform internal audits in
accordance with Article 61 of the PFEM law and strengthen the internal audit
departments in four line ministries (Ministry of Public Health, MoTCA, MRRD, and
Ministry of Energy and Water) by reviewing their institutional arrangements,
methodologies, procedures and staff capacity.

Completed

The Internal Audit Department of the Ministry of Finance will perform internal audits in
accordance with Article 61 of the PFEM law and strengthen the internal audit
departments in an extra ten line ministries.

End-March
2012

The Internal Audit Department of the Ministry of Finance will perform internal audits in
accordance with Article 61 of the PFEM law and strengthen the internal audit
departments in all remaining line ministries.

End-March
2013

External audit
Submit to parliament the new audit law.

Completed

63
Table 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Banking System Action Plan
Objective

Measures

Target Date

Minimize fiscal
costs and
protect the
banking
system

1.
Kabul Bank will be placed in receivership and its banking license
revoked. All shareholder share ownership and related rights and interests
will be extinguished. The receiver will split assets and liabilities into a good
bank and the remaining Kabul Bank estate. The good assets, the
legitimate deposits, the DAB current account liability, and the salary
payments services will be transferred to a bridge bank, aka the good bank,
which will be a newly incorporated entity with a new banking license.

Done in April
2011

2.
The central bank will issue a banking license for the bridge bank
and its shares will be temporarily owned by the Ministry of Finance. The
FDRC will approve an asset/liability split from the balance sheet of the
receivership, which will include the transfer of a current account position
with the central bank held by the former Kabul Bank and the assumption of
its legitimate deposit liabilities. This current account balance will include
the proceeds of a lender-of-last-resort facility agreed upon by the
conservator prior to the decision of receivership.

Done in April
2011

3.
Enforce the regularization and repayments of Kabul Bank loans
extended to shareholders and major borrowers via legally binding
agreements for the full amounts attributed to them as of date. Agreements
should identify collaterals, including real estate title deeds or physical
assets – and cash repayments. Agreements will not preclude collection of
additional debt, should such debt be identified during subsequent audits,
nor will they preclude prosecution in case of violation of the Afghan law.
Registration and perfection of security interests in all identified collateral
will occur within a reasonable period from the date of the agreements.
Those failing to comply with the attributed amounts will be pursued
through the legal system.

See Table 5.

4.
Finalize an 18-month fully-funded business plan for the bridge
bank, focused on its rapid downsizing. The plan, together with related
official documentation, will contain the following elements: (i) preparation
for sale within 5 months and, if the sale fails, a provision that the bank will
be liquidated no later than September 2012; (ii) quarterly budgets; (iii)
strict limits on operations with no new lending; (iv) semi-annual targets for
the reduction of staff and branches and shedding of business products,
including credit card business to reduce costs and the systemic
importance of the bank; (v) migration of Kabul Bank’s salary payments
activities to other banks capable of performing the service, beginning with
the allocation of some salary payments contracts to other banks in an
open bidding to be conducted as soon as possible. Request for proposals
for the bidding will be aligned with sound practice to ensure that banks that
are not sufficiently qualified to perform the service will not be included; (vi)
to ensure legitimate remaining deposits will be honored, deposits affiliated
with shareholders and related interests will be excluded and deposits
larger than $500,000 will be reviewed; (vii) prepare monthly activity reports
including management accounts; and (viii) impose service charges and
reduce interest rates on deposits effective May 1, 2011. The plan will also
mention a commitment to have the bank audited on an annual basis by an
external audit firm.

Done in April
2011

64

Table 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Banking System Action
Plan
Objective

Measures

Target Date

5.
The authorities will publicly announce the government's overall
strategy to enforce the laws of Afghanistan with respect to ensuring
accountability for economic crimes, including any crimes found to have
been committed at Kabul Bank or associated with the Kabul Bank crisis
that are prosecuted by the authorities. Among other things, the strategy
will outline key steps to be taken and establish a timeframe for these
steps. The Government will include reference to the approach and timeline
that will be taken by this team in the public statement issued by DAB. Any
crimes committed at Kabul Bank or associated with the Kabul Bank crisis
that are prosecuted by the authorities, will be handled by a prosecution
task force/team within the Anti Corruption Unit of the AGO appointed by
the attorney general. The team will operate according to its defined work
procedures and timelines, and shall have the roles, powers and
independence given to its office under the relevant Afghan law;
documentation describing this shall be provided to the IMF. The team will
be supported by members who possess knowledge and expertise on
financial issues.

Pending (prior
action)

6.
The receivership management team, supported by an asset
management specialist, will work on the recovery of the receivership’s
assets and other assets collected from shareholders and non-performing
loans with the primary purpose of realizing maximum recoverable value for
claimants. All related parties’ loans even if restructured or collateralized
will be included in the assets to be recovered by the asset management
team. The receiver will produce monthly activity reports, including
management accounts, and be audited on an annual basis by an external
audit firm.

Ongoing

7.
The authorities will pursue through mutual legal assistance the
possibility of identifying, freezing, seizing and confiscating laundered
property and proceeds used or intended for use in money laundering and
other offenses related to Kabul Bank. The authorities will seek advice from
the audit firm on the format of the requests.

Ongoing

8.
A legally binding agreement between the Ministry of Finance and
the central bank will be executed to capitalize the central bank for the
amount of the lender of last resort (LOLR) loans needed to finance Kabul
Bank resolution. Under the agreement, the Ministry of Finance will issue a
debt instrument to the central bank with net present value of 37.6 billion
Afghani, equivalent to $825 million, with an eight year maturity and
quarterly payments totaling 3.4 billion Afghani in the first year ($73 million),
which will increase over time as required to fulfill the commitment. Annual
payments will be explicitly recorded in the budget and the medium-term
fiscal framework, beginning with an approved attachment to the 2011/12
budget, to be passed during the current fiscal year. The agreement will
specify that its purpose is to fund the deposit guarantee extended to Kabul
Bank depositors, explain the exceptional nature of such support, and
commit the Ministry of Finance to make amortization payments to the
central bank as required in the future.

Done in
October 2011

65
Table 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Banking System Action
Plan
Objective

Measures
9.

Promote
transparency,
reduce moral
hazard, and
address
banking
system
vulnerabilities

Target Date

Final resolution.
i.

The bridge bank will be offered for sale in a transparent way,
involving a pre-qualification process to ensure that controlling
shareholders, beneficial owners, directors and management of
intending bidders are fit and proper (which implies, inter alia,
that an intending bidder is subject to a high standard of
corporate governance, including risk management and internal
controls, and that an intending bidder is in a sound financial
and risk management state), and that the intending bidder
controls adequate resources and has the necessary capacity
and capability to ensure the ongoing provision of the relevant
salary payments services. There will be a request for
expressions of interest locally and internationally for the sale
of the bridge bank. Interested parties will be given four weeks
to respond with intention to participate in the bid. Once the
central bank has vetted potential buyers, it will give them a
deadline for sealed bids.

End-June 2012

ii.

If there is no interest from a suitable buyer or the sale fails,
salary and other payment services will migrate to other banks
as a part of branch closings and deposit migrations. Unwanted
branches will be offered at negative prices or be closed. By
end-March 2013, all remaining deposits will be transferred to
other banks and the bridge banks’ license will be revoked.

July 2012 to
End-March
2013

10.
In consultations with Fund staff, the Ministry of Finance and the
central bank shall agree on the interpretation to be accorded to the
framework for central bank’s capital requirements and on the possible
amendments to the central bank law in this regard, in a manner that
ensures the financial autonomy of the central bank in conducting monetary
policy, safeguards central bank’s resources (including the use international
reserves and the provision of the lender of last resort facility), adheres to
international accounting standards and best practices, and is fiscally
sustainable. The Ministry of Finance and the central bank shall sign a
memorandum of understanding that will, accordingly, spell out the
modalities of and procedures for the ministry’s interventions in addressing
potential central bank’s capital shortfalls. Subsequently, the Ministry of
Finance will recapitalize the central bank as required.

End-December
2011

11.
Issue a detailed public statement describing (i) key events leading
to the run at Kabul Bank; (ii) actions taken and to be taken to protect
depositors and the financial system; (iii) the condition of the bank; (iv)
actions taken and to be taken to address suspicions or evidence of fraud,
misreporting, money laundering, and corruption; (v) the envisaged
resolution strategy, and (vi) the way in which the insolvency will be funded
(including the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and the intention to
pay with government revenue) and efforts to recover the bank’s assets.

Done in April
2011

66
Table 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Banking System Action
Plan
Objective

Measures

Target Date

12.
Initiate an audit of Kabul Bank and Azizi Bank to be carried out by
a reputable international audit firm. The work will focus on investigations
aimed at determining the presence of accounting or other irregularities, as
well as compliance with prudential and other regulations and laws. In
relation to ECF conditionality, the firm chosen to conduct the audit (the
“Auditor”) and the terms of reference will be agreed with IMF staff and all
communications and reports including management letters will be shared
promptly with IMF staff. The Auditor will have unrestricted access to the
banks, their records, their shareholders, management, and staff. The
Auditor will also be authorized to communicate with third parties to gather
information on matters related to the audit and the central bank will
authorize the Auditor to communicate with IMF staff. The Auditor will issue
interim reports within 30 days of commencing work. The audits will include,
but not be restricted to, an assessment of (i) the banks’ management;
(ii) the quality of the banks’ assets, (iii) the completeness of liabilities,
including off-balance sheet commitments; (iv) liquidity position and use of
the lender of last resort facility from the central bank (if any); (v) the
accuracy of reports and information submitted to the central bank since
2005; (vi) compliance with prudential regulations; and (vii) any illegal
activity, including, but not exclusive to, related party lending, fraud and
compliance with AML/CFT law and regulations.

Done in August
2011

13.

Done in
September
2011

Audit company issues inception reports.

14.
An independent in-depth public inquiry into the Kabul Bank crisis
will be launched, with terms of reference to be agreed with IMF staff. The
inquiry will cover the period from the licensing of Kabul Bank to February
2012 and will focus on the appropriateness, effectiveness, and timeliness
of the response of the government, the central bank, and the justice
system for the purposes of safeguarding the financial sector, deal with
governance issues, and implement Afghan law. The independence of the
body conducting the inquiry will be described and guaranteed in the terms
of reference, and the budget for the inquiry, including salaries, should be
independently administered. The body conducting the inquiry will have the
right to determine its own agenda and the powers to enquire under Afghan
law. The goal is to increase awareness, transparency and draw lessons
that could be used to protect the financial sector and prevent similar
events in the future.

End-September
2012

15.
In line with the authorities’ desire to protect the financial system
from abuse, the government will produce a roadmap with a strategy to
build capacity and improve the institutional framework to respond promptly
to economic crime. This roadmap will address issues related to the
prosecution system to reinforce its independence to ensure accountability
for economic crimes and build capacity for investigation and prosecution of
these crimes as well as determine the most appropriate institutional
framework going forward.

End-March
2012

67
Table 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Banking System Action
Plan
Objective

Strengthen
banking
supervision

Measures

Target Date

16.
Reputable international firm/s will initiate financial audits of 10
additional banks.

End-October
2011

17.

Audit reports are finalized and issued.

End-March
2012

18.

The report of the public inquiry will be published.

End-September
2012

19.
Drawing on the February 2010 on-site inspection of Kabul Bank
and on the experience of central bank staff involved in Kabul Bank’s
conservatorship, the central bank will prepare an operational note,
including a summary of lessons learned and a checklist of key procedures
for use during future on-site inspections of banks.
20.

Done in
December
2010

The central bank’s enforcement committee will
i.

review all banks’ compliance with previous enforcement
measures and issue supervisory orders with timetables for
compliance and sanctions for failure to comply with the key
corrective actions previously recommended;

Done in
September
2011

ii.

after that, the committee will review on a monthly basis
progress with compliance and impose sanctions in line with
the Enforcement Regulation (e.g., fines, suspension of profit
distribution, restriction on bank branching or lending,
conservatorship, and bankruptcy).

Ongoing

21.
The central bank will enforce in full banking regulations and
circulars by
i.

removing shareholders from serving as Chairman and CEO of
the bank they own;

Done in
October 2011

ii.

continuing the evaluation of the qualifications of shareholders
and management and removing those who are not “fit and
proper” as they become apparent.

Ongoing

22.
The central bank will issue an enforcement letter to Azizi Bank
based on an ongoing on-site examination with a strict timetable and
enforcement actions for non compliance. The actions will include i) specific
capitalization requirement; ii) budget and business plan requirements for
improvement in profitability; and iii) detailed plan for reduction of overlimit
business lines.

Done in August
2011

23.
As part of off-site supervision, the central bank will compile
quarterly reports based on the data submissions from banks, including
Financial Stability Indicators, including banks’ prudential ratios, capital
adequacy ratio, liquidity ratio, concentration ratio, related loan ratio, and
other relevant information statistics, such as loan and deposit amounts for
largest borrowers and depositors for each bank.

Throughout,
beginning June
2011

68
Table 3. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Banking System Action
Plan (Concluded)
Objective

Measures

Target Date

24.
The central bank will review the existing Enforcement Regulation
in light of amendments to the Banking Law as submitted to Parliament
(supervisory warnings, orders, plans to take corrective action, and orders
to take prompt corrective action by commercial banks). The central bank
will prepare revisions of the Enforcement Regulation so as to be ready for
implementation of the revised Banking Law when enacted.

End-April 2012

Improve legal
and regulatory
framework

25.
Submit to Parliament the amended or new banking law, prepared
in consultation with the Fund, that will strengthen provisions on corporate
governance, capital, large exposures, related parties, consolidated
supervision, early intervention, enforcement, and bank resolution, where
appropriate in line with the Basel Core Principles. Specifically, the law
should enable the authorities to enforce upon a bank––going concern––all
necessary resolution measures and strengthen corporate governance
requirements for banks (including fit and proper requirements as set by the
FATF standards).

End-September
2012

Accounting
standards,
insolvency
and creditors’
rights,
AML/CFT

26.
Implement plan to address bulk cash movement at Kabul airport
(all passengers including VIP to complete serialized inbound/outbound
currency declaration forms and space for the central bank to process
forms and conduct identifications and checks) with a view to deterring
transfers of proceeds of crime and fraud.

End-December
2012

27.
Request an insolvency and creditor rights assessment
(ICR ROSC) from the World Bank to identify remaining weaknesses and
design action plan to resolve them, including legislative proposals for
foreclosure of collateral and loan recovery.

End-June 2012

28.
Following IMF assessment of the AML/CFT regime in 2011 and
presentation to and adoption by the Asia Pacific Group, the central bank
will devise and begin implementing an action plan with a timeframe
(involving relevant authorities), to address the findings and
recommendations of the assessment.

End-September
2012

29.
The central bank will prepare and distribute guidance and training
materials to financial institutions along with a schedule of on-site training
for 2011/2012, with a view to ensuring that key money laundering and
terrorist finance risk and lessons learned from Kabul Bank are properly
reflected in those materials.

End-March
2012

30.
Establish a government-led National Steering Committee (NSC) to
coordinate, supervise and direct financial reporting and auditing reforms.
The NSC will develop an action plan (including short, medium and longterm measures) to develop accounting and auditing capacity in
Afghanistan in line with the recommendations of the 2009 ROSC.

End-May 2012

Table 4. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Quantitative Targets, 2011-13 1/
(on a cumulative basis from the beginning of the respective fiscal year, unless otherwise indicated)
Mar. 20, 2011
Stocks

June 21, 2011
Actual

FY 2011/12
Sep. 22, 2011 Dec. 21, 2011
Indicative
Actual
targets

Mar. 19, 2012
Performance
criteria

June 20, 2012
Indicative
targets

FY 2012/13
Sep. 21, 2012 Dec. 20, 2012
Performance
criteria
Projection

Mar. 20, 2013
Projection

(In billions of Afghanis)
Floor on revenues of the central government

…

22.2

46.7

71.6

98.8

23.8

50.4

78.2

109.0

Indicative target (ceiling) on currency in circulation

132.4

1.3

11.3

16.6

23.6

1.5

12.7

18.3

26.2

Ceiling on net central bank credit to the central government

-48.9

29.3

25.0

17.8

24.8

-9.5

-4.4

-11.2

1.9

Indicative target (ceiling) on the operating budget deficit
of the government, excluding grants

…

0.5

12.0

33.8

52.6

10.1

29.2

44.7

71.3

Indicative target (floor) on social and other priority spending

…

4.5

9.0

13.5

18.0

4.8

9.7

14.5

19.4

151.0

15.4

16.7

15.0

28.4

-4.0

6.5

15.7

30.6

117

234

351

468

Ceiling on reserve money

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Floor on net international reserves of DAB

5,017

450

514

572

630

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on short-term external debt owed or guaranteed by the public sector 2/

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

New external payments arrears, excluding interest on preexisting arrears 2/

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Ceiling on lending from state-owned banks or the central bank to public enterprises in
need of restructuring or government guaranteeing borrowing by these enterprises 2/

…

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

…

17.1

19.3

18.4

13.4

5.1

4.8

9.8

3.6

…
…
…
...
…

5.3
21.1
0.0
0.0
0.0

16.7
43.6
0.9
0.0
0.0

33.5
85.4
1.8
0.0
0.0

53.4
115.3
3.5
0.0
0.0

4.2
22.8
0.9
0.0
0.0

23.9
55.7
1.9
0.0
0.0

41.7
94.7
2.8
0.0
0.0

64.1
129.8
3.7
0.0
0.0

Memorandum items:
Operating budget balance of the government, including grants

(In billions of Afghanis)

Reference projections for the adjustors
Core budget development spending
External financing of the core budget and sale or transfers of nonfinancial assets
Asset recovery from banking sector institutions in liquidation
Recapitalization, profit distribution and revaluation of MoF securities at DAB
Externally financed expenditures transferred to the core operating budget
Source: Afghan authorities
1/ The performance criteria and indicative targets under the program, and their adjustors, are defined in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding.
2/ These targets apply on a continuous basis.

69

Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing new medium- and long-term
nonconcessional external debt by the public sector 2/

70
Table 5. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Prior Actions and Structural
Benchmarks
Prior Actions

Status

Kabul Bank will be put under receivership and its banking
license revoked. All shareholder ownership and related
rights and interests will be extinguished. The receiver will
split assets and liabilities into a good bank (bridge bank)
and the remaining Kabul Bank estate.

Done in April 2011

Finalize an 18-month business plan for the bridge bank.

Done in April 2011

Issue detailed public statement about the events leading to
the collapse of Kabul Bank and the actions taken and to be
taken to deal with the crisis.

Done in April 2011

Finalize legally binding agreements with cooperating Kabul
Bank shareholders for the repayment of the full amounts
attributed to them as of date. Agreements should identify
collaterals, including real estate title deeds or physical
assets––and cash repayments.

As of October 30th, we estimate the assets
sought for recovery at US$935 million,
including US$80 million in regular loans to
parties other than the shareholders and related
parties. Legally binding agreements for
US$270 million have been signed so far with
cooperating shareholders and related parties,
pledging collateral of US$232 million. Under
these legally binding agreements,
US$36 million in cash has been collected. In
addition, US$153 million in ceded assets are
available for sale by the receiver. Including the
regular loans, payment plans and ceded assets
indicate a recovery of US$483 million is
possible—US$350 million from legally binding
agreements and performing loans plus assets
ceded to the receiver not covered by the legally
binding agreements. Of this, total cash receipts
since August 31, 2010 amount to
US$75 million taking together payments under
the legally binding agreements, payments
made outside an agreement framework and
from the performing loans. The Government
acknowledges that complexity of the fraud has
slowed recovery effort; however, based on
improved cooperation by bank executives and
the work of the forensic auditors, it is confident
that legally binding agreements for additional
recoveries will be reached. In parallel, formal
charges have been brought against
2 shareholders representing over 50 percent of
assets sought for recovery and 7 officers of the
bank. Negotiations over additional legally
binding agreements are ongoing.

71

Ministry of Finance to issue 8-year bond to capitalize the
central bank to cover the cost of Kabul Bank’s resolution
($825 million) and obtain parliamentary approval for a
budget appropriation to service the bond.

Done. An US$825 million promissory note was
issued on April 10, 2011, and Parliament
approved the budget appropriation for
FY2011/12 on October 15, 2011.

Formulate and announce strategy to enforce Afghan laws
in relation to any financial crimes committed at Kabul Bank.
The strategy will include steps and a timetable as well as
documentation on the roles, powers, qualifications, and
independence of the prosecution team.

Authorities have shared draft strategy with
staff.

Complete inception report for audits of Kabul Bank and
Azizi Bank.

Done. Report for Kabul Bank completed in July
2011, for Azizi Bank––in September 2011.

The central bank will issue an enforcement letter for Azizi
Bank (in consultation with Fund staff) based on a recent onsite examination listing key actions to be undertaken, a
timetable, and penalties and sanctions for non-compliance.

Done in August 2011.

The central bank will issue supervisory orders to selected
banks with timetables for compliance and sanctions for
failure to comply with key corrective actions previously
recommended.

Done in September 2011.

The central bank will enforce in full conflict-of-interest
regulations and circulars in the banking sector by removing
shareholders from serving as Chairman and CEO of the
bank they own.

Done as of October 31, 2011.

Structural Benchmarks for the First Review

Rationale

Status/Comments

In consultations with Fund staff, the Ministry of Finance and
the central bank will agree, in a memorandum of
understanding, on the central bank’s capitalization needs
and a schedule for recapitalizing the central bank as
needed.

Financial sector
stability, central
bank independence
and ability to
conduct monetary
policy

End-December 2011

Submit VAT law—consistent with IMF advice—aimed at
raising the revenue to GDP ratio to the Ministry of Justice
(“Taqnin”) for review with a view to submitting it to
parliament by end-December 2012.

Support fiscal
sustainability

End-December 2011

Submit to the Ministry of Justice (“Taqnin”) legislation
bringing public enterprises under effective monitoring and
oversight of the Ministry of Finance.

Support fiscal
sustainability and
macroeconomic
stability by
enhancing controls
and reducing fiscal
risks

End- March 2012

72
Roll out to at least two additional Border Crossing Points
the new Border Management Model piloted at Hairatan
Border Crossing Point. The model is based on a ‘twoagency’ approach which restricts border presence to the
Afghan Border Police and the Afghan Customs
Department. Under this model, the ABP will continue to
fulfill immigration and security responsibilities, with ACD
fulfilling all other commercial and trade-related duties.

Improve efficiency
and lower corruption

End-March 2012

Reduce number of branches at bridge bank (New Kabul
Bank) by 20 according to the updated business plan.

Minimize fiscal costs

End-March 2012

In line with our desire to protect the financial system from
abuse, the government will produce a roadmap with a
strategy to build capacity and improve the institutional
framework to respond promptly to economic crime. This
roadmap will address issues related to the prosecution
system to reinforce its independence to ensure
accountability for economic crimes and build capacity for
investigation and prosecution of these crimes as well as
determine the most appropriate institutional framework
going forward

Financial sector
stability and
integrity, reduce
moral hazard

End-March 2012

Structural Benchmarks for the Second Review

Rationale

Status/Comments

The bridge bank (New Kabul Bank) will be offered for sale
in a transparent way, involving a pre-qualification process
to ensure that controlling shareholders, beneficial owners,
directors and management of intending bidders are fit and
proper (which implies, inter alia, that an intending bidder is
subject to a high standard of corporate governance,
including risk management and internal controls, and that
an intending bidder is in a sound financial and risk
management state), and that the intending bidder controls
adequate resources and has the necessary capacity and
capability to ensure the ongoing provision of the relevant
salary payments services. There will be a request for
expressions of interest locally and internationally for the
sale of the bridge bank. Interested parties will be given four
weeks to respond with intention to participate in the bid.
Once the central bank has vetted potential buyers, it will
give them a deadline for sealed bids.

Advance Kabul
Bank resolution

End-June 2012

The independent Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
will conduct an in-depth public inquiry to examine the
events leading to the Kabul Bank crisis, starting with the
inception of the bank, and look into the operations of the
bank, activities of its shareholders, the role of supervisory
and auditing bodies, and the subsequent effectiveness of
the government and the criminal justice system in dealing
with any crimes committed.

Strengthen financial
sector stability,
transparency

End-September 2012

73
Submit to Parliament the amended or new banking law,
prepared in consultation with the Fund that will strengthen
provisions on corporate governance, capital, large
exposures, related parties, consolidated supervision, early
intervention, enforcement, and bank resolution, where
appropriate in line with the Basel Core Principles.
Specifically, the law should enable us to enforce upon a
bank - going concern - all necessary resolution measures
and strengthen corporate governance requirements for
banks (including fit and proper requirements as set by the
FATF standards).

Promote financial
sector stability by
strengthening
independence of
bank regulators,
reducing risks from
bank lending, and
ensuring swift
processes for bank
resolution

End-September 2012

Strengthen our AML/CFT regime by implementing an action
plan based on the recommendations of the February 2011
assessment by: (i) submitting amendments to the AML/CFT
law to parliament as necessary; (ii) increasing the capacity
of FinTRACA, including by hiring additional staff as needed;
(iii) expanding MSP registration and implementation of
reporting to MSPs in areas currently inaccessible for
security reasons if and when the security situation allows;
and (iv) enforcing MSP reporting by dedicated software in
all reporting areas where it is technically and logistically
feasible..

Promote financial
sector stability and
integrity and
strengthen
AML/CFT framework

End-September 2012

Submit legislation to Parliament for the introduction of
marketable debt instruments by the Ministry of Finance.

Develop financial
markets

End-September 2012

74
ATTACHMENT II. TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
1.
This memorandum reflects understandings between the Afghan authorities and Fund staff
in relation to the monitoring of the ECF-supported program during 2011–12. It specifies valuation
for monitoring quantitative targets under the program (Section I), quantitative performance criteria
and indicative targets (Section II), adjustors (Section III), and data reporting (Section IV).

I. PROGRAM EXCHANGE RATES AND GOLD VALUATION
2.
Program exchange rates are used for formulating and monitoring quantitative targets. All
foreign assets and liabilities denominated in U.S. dollars will be converted into Afghanis at a
program exchange rate of 45.3740 Afghanis per U.S. dollar, which corresponds to the cash rate
of March 20, 2011. Gold holdings will be valued at US$1,418.90 per troy ounce, the price as of
March 20, 2011. Assets and liabilities denominated in SDRs and in foreign currencies other than
the U.S. dollar will be converted into U.S. dollars at their respective exchange rates
of March 20, 2011, as reported in the following table.
Exchange Rate
U.S. dollars / Canadian dollar
U.S. dollars / U.A.E. dirham
U.S. dollars / Egyptian pound
U.S. dollars / euro
U.S. dollars / Hong Kong dollar
U.S. dollars / Indian rupee
U.S. dollars / Pakistani rupee
U.S. dollars / Polish zloty
U.S. dollars / Iranian rial
U.S. dollars / Saudi Arabian riyal
U.S. dollars / Russian ruble
U.S. dollars / Swiss franc
U.S. dollars / pounds sterling
U.S. dollars / SDR

Program Rate
1.016000
0.272300
0.168600
1.418200
0.128200
0.022160
0.011715
0.348800
0.000097
0.266600
0.035180
1.109800
1.623400
1.585700

II. QUANTITATIVE PERFORMANCE CRITERIA AND INDICATIVE TARGETS
3.
The quantitative performance criteria for March and September 2012 specified
in Table 4 of the MEFP are:


Floors on revenue of the central government and net international reserves (NIR); and



Ceilings on reserve money; net central bank credit to the central government (NCG);
contracting and/or guaranteeing new medium- and long-term nonconcessional
external debt by the public sector, (continuous); short-term external debt owed or
guaranteed by the public sector (continuous); accumulation of external payment
arrears, excluding interest on preexisting arrears (continuous); lending from state-

75
owned banks or the central bank to, or government guaranteed borrowing by, public
enterprises in need of restructuring (continuous).
4.
The above variables also constitute indicative targets for December 2011 and
June 2012. In addition, the program includes the following indicative targets for the four
above-mentioned dates:


Ceilings on currency in circulation and on the operating budget deficit of the central
government excluding grants; and



Floor on social and other priority spending.

5.
The central government consists of the Office of the President, the ministries and
other state administrations and governmental agencies, including the Attorney General’s
Office; the National Assembly; and the judiciary, including the Supreme Court.
6.
Reserve money is defined as currency in circulation plus Afghani-denominated
commercial bank deposits at the central bank, including balances maintained by the
commercial banks in the DAB’s overnight facility.
7.
Currency in circulation is defined as total currency issued by the DAB. It excludes
currency held in the presidential palace vault, in the DAB main vault, and in the vaults of all
provincial and district branches of the DAB.
8.
Net central bank credit to the government is defined as the difference between the
central bank’s claims on the government and government deposits at the DAB. These
deposits exclude deposits held at the DAB’s branches because of the unavailability of
reliable and timely data from the DAB’s branches.
9.
Net international reserves (NIR) are defined as reserve assets minus reserve
liabilities of the DAB, both of which are expressed in U.S. dollars.


Reserve assets of the DAB, as defined in the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments
Manual (BPM5), are claims on nonresidents denominated in foreign convertible
currencies controlled by DAB, and are readily and unconditionally available for DAB
to meet balance of payments financing needs, intervention in exchange markets, and
other purposes. They include DAB holdings of monetary gold, SDRs, Afghanistan’s
reserve position in the IMF, foreign currency cash (including foreign exchange
banknotes in the vaults of the DAB, but excluding cash held in the DAB’s branches),
and deposits abroad (including balances on accounts maintained with overseas
correspondent banks). Excluded from reserve assets are any assets that are pledged,
collateralized, or otherwise encumbered; claims on residents; precious metals other
than monetary gold; assets in nonconvertible currencies; illiquid assets; and claims on

76
foreign exchange arising from derivatives in foreign currencies vis-à-vis domestic
currency (such as futures, forwards, swaps, and options).


Reserve liabilities are defined as short-term (original maturity) foreign exchange
liabilities of DAB to nonresidents (held at DAB headquarters); all credit outstanding
from the IMF; foreign currency reserves of commercial banks held at DAB
headquarters; commitments to sell foreign exchange arising from derivatives (such as
futures, forwards, swaps, and options); and all arrears on principal or interest
payments to commercial banks, suppliers, or official export credit agencies.

10.
Revenues of the central government are defined in line with the Government
Financial Statistics Manual (GFSM 2001) but on a cash accounting basis, excluding grants.
Revenue is an increase in net worth of the central government (including its units in the
provinces and agencies) resulting from a transaction.


Revenues of the central government include taxes and other compulsory transfers
imposed by central government units, property income derived from the ownership of
assets, sales of goods and services, social contributions, interest, fines, penalties and
forfeits and voluntary transfers received from nongovernment other than grants. The
definition for program monitoring excludes grants and other noncompulsory
contributions received from foreign governments and international organizations;
such transfers between central government units would be eliminated in the
consolidation of the fiscal reports and not recorded as revenue. Receipts collected by
central government on behalf of noncentral government units should not be counted
as revenue (e.g., Red Crescent fees). Receipts from the sale of nonfinancial assets,
such as privatization, and transactions in financial assets and liabilities, such as
borrowing but excepting interest payments, are also excluded from the definition of
revenue.



Revenues should be recognized on a cash basis and flows should be recorded when
cash is received. The official Afghanistan Government Financial Management
Information System (AFMIS) reports will be used as the basis for program monitoring.
Exceptional advanced payments will be treated as if received on the normal due date.
All revenue must be supported by the relevant documentation and revenue receivables,
where a cash sum has been recorded but the revenue item has not yet been accounted
for, and revenues payable, where the revenue has been reported but the cash has yet to
be recorded should be separately reported on a gross basis.

11.
Social and other priority spending is defined as the sum of pro-poor spending
identified in accordance with the ANDS poverty profile by the Ministry of Education,
Ministry of Public Health, and Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs, and Disabled
within the central government’s operating budget for a particular fiscal year.

77
12.
For program purposes, the definition of external debt is set out in Executive Board
Decision No. 12274, as revised on August 31, 2009 (Decision No. 14416-(09/91)).
(a)
The term “debt” will be understood to mean a current (i.e., not contingent)
liability, created under a contractual arrangement through the provision of value in the form
of assets (including currency) or services, and which requires the obligor to make one or
more payments in the form of assets (including currency) or services, at some future point(s)
in time; these payments will discharge the principal and/or interest liabilities incurred under
the contract. Debts can take a number of forms, the primary ones being as follows:
(i)
loans (i.e., advances of money) to the obligor by the lender made on
the basis of an undertaking that the obligor will repay the funds in the future
(including deposits, bonds, debentures, commercial loans and buyers’ credits)
and temporary exchanges of assets that are equivalent to fully collateralized
loans under which the obligor is required to repay the funds, and usually pay
interest, by repurchasing the collateral from the buyer in the future (such as
repurchase agreements and official swap arrangements);
(ii)
suppliers’ credits (i.e., contracts where the supplier permits the obligor
to defer payments until sometime after the date on which the goods are
delivered or services are provided); and
(iii) leases (i.e., arrangements under which property is provided which the
lessee has the right to use for one or more specified period(s) of time that are
usually shorter than the total expected service life of the property), while the
lessor retains the title to the property. For the purpose of the guideline, the
debt is the present value (at the inception of the lease) of all lease payments
expected to be made during the period of the agreement excluding those
payments that cover the operation, repair or maintenance of the property.
(b)
Under the definition of debt set out in paragraph 12 (a) above, arrears,
penalties, and judicially awarded damages arising from the failure to make payment under a
contractual obligation that constitutes debt are debt. Failure to make payment on an
obligation that is not considered debt under this definition (e.g., payment on delivery) will
not give rise to debt.
13.
Long term and medium term external debt. A ceiling applies to the contracting
and guaranteeing by the public sector of new nonconcessional borrowing debt with
nonresidents with original maturities of one year or more. The ceiling applies to debt and
commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has not yet been received. This
applies to private debt for which official guarantees have been extended and which,
therefore, constitute a contingent liability of the public sector. Excluded from the limits are
refinancing credits and rescheduling operations, credits extended by the IMF, and credits on
concessional terms as defined below. Consistent with the Public Finance and Expenditure

78
Management (PFEM) Law, the MOF should have sole responsibility for the contracting and
guaranteeing of external debt on behalf of the government.


The definition of “government” includes the central government (including
government departments), as well as official agencies that do not seek profit and
whose budgets are issued independent of the annual operational or development
budgets. The public sector comprises the government as defined above, the DAB, and
nonfinancial public enterprises. Public enterprises are defined below in paragraph 16.



For program purposes, the guarantee of a debt arises from any explicit legal
obligation of the public sector to service a debt in the event of nonpayment by the
debtor (involving payments in cash or in kind), or from any implicit legal or
contractual obligation of the public sector to finance partially or in full any a shortfall
incurred by the debtor.



For program purposes, a debt is concessional if it includes a grant element of at least
60 percent, calculated as follows: the grant element of a debt is the difference between
the present value (PV) of debt and its nominal value, expressed as a percentage of the
nominal value of the debt. The PV of debt at the time of its contracting is calculated by
discounting the future stream of payments of debt service due on this debt. The discount
rates used for this purpose are the currency specific commercial interest reference rates
(CIRRs), published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD). For debt with a maturity of at least 15 years, the ten-year-average CIRR will be
used to calculate the PV of debt and, hence, its grant element. For debt with a maturity of
less than 15 years, the six-month average CIRR will be used. To both the ten-year and
six-month averages, the same margins for differing repayment periods as those used by
the OECD need to be added (0.75 percent for repayment periods of less than 15 years,
1 percent for 15 to 19 years, 1.15 percent for 20 to 29 years, and 1.25 percent for 30 years
or more).

14.
The zero ceiling on short-term external debt applies on a continuous basis to the
stock of short-term external debt owed or guaranteed by the public sector (as defined in
paragraph 13 of this memorandum), with an original maturity of up to and including one year.


It applies to debt as defined in paragraph 12 of this memorandum.



Excluded from the limit are rescheduling operations (including the deferral of interest
on commercial debt) and normal import-related credits.



The calculation of concessionality will take into account all aspects of the loan agreement, including maturity,
grace period, payment schedule, upfront commissions, and management fees.

79


Debt falling within the limit shall be valued in US dollars at the exchange rate
prevailing at the time the contract or guarantee becomes effective.

15.
A continuous performance criterion applies to the nonaccumulation of new external
payments arrears on external debt contracted or guaranteed by the central government or
the DAB. External payment arrears consist of external debt service obligations (principal and
interest) falling due after March 20, 2011 and that have not been paid at the time they are
due, as specified in the contractual agreements. Excluded from the prohibition on the
accumulation of new arrears are (i) arrears arising from interest on the stock of arrears
outstanding as of March 20, 2011 and (ii) external arrears that are subject to debt
rescheduling agreements or negotiations.
16.
Lending to, or guaranteeing borrowing by, public enterprises. The zero ceiling on
new lending from state-owned banks or the central bank to, or government guaranteed
domestic borrowing by public enterprises in need of restructuring applies on a continuous
basis.


For the purposes of this performance criterion (i) “state-owned banks” refers to those
banks that are wholly or majority owned by the government (as defined in
paragraph 13 of this memorandum), including Bank Millie, Bank Pashtany and New
Kabul Bank; (ii) “public enterprises in need of restructuring” refers to enterprises that
meet either of the following: (a) public enterprises that have not had an audited balance
sheet in the past two fiscal years, (b) public enterprises that have been identified by the
Ministry of Finance for liquidation, or (c) public enterprises that do not have cabinetapproved restructuring plans; and (iii) “public enterprises” refers to enterprises wholly
or majority owned by the government, including those covered by the State-Owned
Enterprise (Tassady) Law, and all state-owned corporations and any other public
entities and government agencies engaged in commercial activities but not covered by
the Tassady Law.



It applies to any new loans (or financial contributions) extended directly from the
central bank or state-owned banks to public enterprises in need of restructuring, and
also to any explicit government guarantees for borrowing undertaken by these public
enterprises (including loan agreements and guarantees for which value has not been
received).

17.
Operating budget deficit of the central government excluding grants is defined as
revenues of the central government minus operating budget expenditure recorded in AFMIS.
III. ADJUSTORS
18.
The floor on NIR and the ceiling on the NCG are consistent with the assumption that
core budget development spending will amount, on a cumulative basis from
March 20, 2011, to:

80
December 21, 2011
March 19, 2012
June 20, 2012
September 21, 2012

Af 33.5 billion
Af 53.4 billion
Af 4.2 billion
Af 23.9 billion

Should core budget development spending exceed these projections, the NIR floor will be
adjusted downward and the NCG ceiling will be adjusted upward by the difference between the
actual level (up to the appropriated amount) and the projected level of development spending.
19.
The NIR floor and NCG ceiling are defined consistent with the assumption that
the external financing of the core budget and receipts from the sale or transfer of
nonfinancial assets will amount, on a cumulative basis from March 20, 2011, to:

December 21, 2011
March 19, 2012
June 20, 2012
September 21, 2012

Af 85.4 billion
Af 115.3 billion
Af 22.8 billion
Af 55.7 billion

Should external financing of the core budget (including that associated with off-budgetary
spending coming on budget) and the receipts from the sale or transfer of nonfinancial assets
collectively exceed (fall short of) these projections, the NIR floor will be adjusted upward
(downward) and the NCG ceiling will be adjusted downward (upward) by the difference
between their actual level and the projected level. The overall downward adjustment to the
NIR floor will be capped at $500 million and the overall upward adjustment to the NCG
ceiling will be capped at Af 25 billion.
20.
The NIR floor and NCG ceiling are defined consistent with the assumption that the asset
recovery from banking sector institutions in liquidation applied towards MoF assets or liabilities at
DAB will amount, on a cumulative basis from March 20, 2011, to:

December 21, 2011
March 19, 2012
June 20, 2012
September 21, 2012

Af 1.8 billion
Af 3.5 billion
Af 0.9 billion
Af 1.9 billion

Should such asset recovery exceed (fall short of) these projections, the NIR floor will be
adjusted upward (downward) and the NCG ceiling will be adjusted downward (upward) by
the difference between the actual recovery and its projected level.
21.
Should DAB be recapitalized by the MoF, the NCG ceiling will be adjusted upward by
the amount of this recapitalization.
Should MoF receive profit distribution from DAB, the NCG ceiling will be adjusted
22.
downward by the amount of this profit distribution.

81
23.
Should some expenditure currently financed directly by donors outside the
budget be moved on to the operating budget, the NIR floor will be adjusted downward, and
the NCG ceiling and the indicative targets (ceilings) for the operating budget deficits of the
central government, excluding grants, will be adjusted upward, by the actual amount of these
expenditures on the conditions that (i) the moving on budget of these expenditures is justified
by a statement from donors indicating their decision to stop financing them outside the
budget and (ii) they are subject to a supplementary appropriation approved by parliament.
The overall downward adjustment to the NIR floors will be capped at $300 million.
IV. PROVISION OF INFORMATION TO THE FUND
24.
To facilitate monitoring of program implementation, the government of Afghanistan
will provide the Fund through the office of the Resident Representative of the IMF in
Afghanistan, the information specified below and summarized in the list of reporting tables
provided to the Technical Coordination Committee.
25.

Actual outcomes will be provided with the frequencies and lags indicated below.



DAB net international reserves: weekly, no later than two weeks after the end of each
week.



Monetary statistics, including exchange rates, government accounts with the DAB,
currency in circulation, reserve money, and a monetary survey: monthly and no later
than three weeks after the end of the month. The monetary survey will include the
balance sheet of the DAB and a consolidated balance sheet of the commercial
banking sector.



Core budget operations and their financing: monthly and no later than four weeks
after the end of the month. The official reports for program monitoring will be the
monthly financial statements from the Afghanistan Financial Management
Information System. The structure of financing (grants and loans should be separately
identified) and expenditure data should be on a consistent cash basis. Core operating
expenditures should be reported on a monthly basis using the budget appropriation
economic (object) and administrative classification in addition to the program and
functional classification as reported in the budget documents. Core development
expenditures should also be reported separately on a monthly basis using the budget
program classification in addition to the economic (object), administrative
and functional classification consistent with the operating budget. All the data should
also compare outturns against the approved budget. Core operating and development
revenues and expenditures should also be reported by province, separately on the
same monthly basis.



External budget operations and their financing (i.e., donor funded spending outside
the core budget treasury systems): semiannually (more frequently if possible) and no

82
later than eight weeks after the end of the period. External development expenditures
should be reported on a disbursement basis (as currently defined in budget
documents) using the budget program classification (and an administrative, functional
and provincial classification where possible).


External debt data: quarterly and no later than six weeks after the end of the quarter.
These will include: (i) details of new loans contracted or guaranteed during the
quarter, including the terms of each new loan; (ii) the stock of debt at the end the
quarter, including short-term debt, and medium- and long-term debt; (iii) loan
disbursements and debt service payments (interest and amortization) during the
quarter; (iv) debt relief received during the quarter; (v) information on all overdue
payments on short-term debt, and on medium- and long-term debt, including new
external arrears (if any); and (vi) total outstanding amount of arrears.



National accounts data: annually and no later than eight weeks after the end of the
year. Merchandise trade data should be reported quarterly and no later than eight
weeks after the end of the quarter.



Monthly consumer price indexes (CPIs) for Kabul and other major cities (“national”
CPI) with a lag of four weeks after the end of each month.



Four-monthly and with a three-month lag, financial flows and other key variables of
the state electricity company (DABS), aggregated as well as disaggregated by
regional hubs, for the preceding 12 months and (in the last four-monthly period of the
year) a forecast for the following fiscal year. The report will use the template agreed
with Fund staff, with all lines filled in, but excluding the disaggregation of loses into
technical and nontechnical for regions outside Kabul, which is expected by
March 20, 2013.



Financial Stability Indicators for each commercial bank: quarterly and with a onemonth lag after the end of each quarter. These indicators will include banks’ prudential
ratios, capital adequacy ratio, liquidity ratio, portfolio quality indicators (e.g.,
nonperforming loans, provisions as percentage of classified loans), concentration ratio,
related loan ratio, information on open foreign exchange positions, large loan and
deposits statistics and other relevant information.



Lending to public enterprises from each commercial bank: quarterly with a one-month
lag after the end of each quarter share a report on the following balance sheet items and
operations for each bank: (i) aggregate value of outstanding loans to all public
enterprises; (ii) disaggregated value of outstanding loans by public enterprise for each
bank’s top 10 borrowers; (iii) indicators of the quality of these loans. For this reporting
requirement, public enterprises refer to those defined in point (iii) in the first bullet of
paragraph 16.

83


Monthly activity and cost reports from the Kabul Bank receiver, including the status
and financial details of asset recovery.



Monthly progress reports, interim reports, and final reports by the auditor conducting
the forensic audits of Kabul Bank and Azizi Bank.



Monthly detailed balance sheet and income statement for the bridge bank (with a two
weeks lag) as well as quarterly reports on bridge bank’s progress against its business
and financial plans (staffing, branches, etc.)



Quarterly, details on the amortization payments for the promissory note issued by the
Ministry of Finance to recapitalize the central bank.



Monthly details of the discretionary cash balances held in the Ministry’s Afghani and
U.S. dollar treasury single accounts (TSA), and the discretionary development
27232 account. In addition, an update of the monthly summary report of funds under
operating budget, summaries of expenditure for both the operating budget and
discretionary development budgets, and the updated cash projections for the current
and following fiscal years.

26.
The Technical Coordination Committee (TCC) will send to the IMF reports by the
end of each quarter documenting progress in implementing structural benchmarks under the
program. These reports will include appropriate documentation and explain any deviations
relative to the initial reform timetable, specifying expected revised completion date. Other
details on major economic and social measures taken by the government that are expected to
have an impact on program sequencing (such as changes in legislation, regulations, or any
other pertinent document) will be sent in a timely manner to IMF staff for consultation or
information.

84
APPENDIX II. ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF MILITARY TRANSITION AND TRANSFORMATION
Economic development over the medium term will depend on the impact of the envisaged
draw-down of large-scale foreign military (transition) and civilian engagement with
Afghanistan (transformation), beginning in 2012 and expected to be largely finalized by
2014. 1 The baseline scenario for macroeconomic projections optimistically assumes that
security will stabilize throughout the phase of the military withdrawal, and that civilian
foreign assistance will be phased out gradually over the long term.2 Alternative scenarios
explore possible outcomes if these optimistic assumptions, while clearly desirable, are not
met.
Framework for transition and transformation
1.
The impact of foreign withdrawal from Afghanistan will reverse the economic
effects of large-scale military and civilian foreign presence over the past decade. The
presence added to aggregate demand; provided budget resources and took over directly
certain spending; supported the exchange rate and, potentially lowered competitiveness;
provided civilian employment; and the affected sector-specific allocation of resources. The
economics of withdrawal of foreign entities are determined in good measure by the local
content of their expenditure and procurement and their employment of local staff.
2.
The reduction in foreign presence affects the Afghan economy through the
following transmission channels:3


Income effects would come from lower aggregate demand are a function of lower
local expenditure of foreign civilian organizations and staff; the associated decline in
local procurement; and lower numbers of local employees of foreign civilian
organizations.



The fiscal impact will mainly result from higher on-budget security spending from the
transfer of Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) expenditures to the operating
budget under the Law and Order Trust Fund Afghanistan (LOTFA) and the NATO

1

Following authorization by UN Security Council Resolution 1386 on December 20th, 2001, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has been operating in Afghanistan for almost 10 years.

2

According to the “Declaration by the Heads of State and Government of the Nations contributing to the UNmandated NATO-led International ISAF at the 2010 Lisbon Summit, “ISAF and the Government of
Afghanistan are entering into a new phase of our joint effort, which allows us to help set the conditions for
irreversible transition to full Afghan security responsibility and leadership … by the end of 2014.”

3

Due to data constraints, the analysis does not take into account possible macroeconomic effects of more
limited technical assistance on capacity building in public administration and the associated path for structural
reforms.

85
Training Mission - Afghanistan (NTM-A), higher on-budget operations and
maintenance spending, and lower revenues reflecting the adverse impact on growth.
With external development spending being reduced, there will be increasing pressure
to finance development spending through the budget. In addition, expenditure for
operations, equipment, and maintenance are likely to be substantially higher as
projects are brought on budget as part of the transformation.


The external sector will be affected by a possible reduction or reversal of the termsof-trade effects of foreign presence “Dutch disease;” and trade balance effects
resulting from lower imports by foreign civilian missions.



Labor market effects could include higher unemployment, due to lay-offs of local
staff by foreign civilian organizations; lower employment in sectors closely linked to
the presence of foreign entities; and, as a result, downward pressure on local wages.

Baseline Scenario
3.
Real GDP growth declines over the long term and stabilizes at around 4 percent
per annum, periodically peaking as a result of the mining sector production cycle
(Figure 1). The expected withdrawal of foreign troops would contribute 2–3 percentage
points to the decline in overall growth. The baseline scenario assumes that foreign military
presence will be reduced from currently 139,000 troops to 68,000 by October 2012, and a
minimal presence by 2014. In parallel, the ANSF will grow from about 304,000 at present4 to
400,000 by end-2014 under current government projections.5 In 2011, total appropriation by
ISAF is estimated at US$160 billion, out of which the United States accounts for
US$118 billion. With an assumed local content of this ISAF expenditure of 1.7 percent, the
withdrawal would reduce GDP by 2½ percent per year over the period 2012–14. Sectors
most likely to be affected include construction, wholesale and retail trade, and transport and
storage.
4.
The withdrawal raises fiscal pressures and pushes back fiscal sustainability—
defined as domestic revenues covering total operating expenditures—to 2024/25. The
fiscal impact of transition and transformation will mainly come from increasing pressure to
take over externally-financed operating expenditures (security and nonsecurity); decreasing
grants to the development budget; and a continuing decline in the external budget with
certain expenditures being brought on-budget. As the fragility of the country’s economy is
likely to be most acute during this phase, the baseline scenario (Table 2) assumes a stable
4

As of mid-October, 2011: consisting of 169,000 members of Afghanistan National Army, and
135,000 members of Afghanistan National Police and the Afghan Air Force. (Source: NTM-A)

5

However, the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board recently capped the final force size to 352,000. This
number is under discussion with the government.

86
donor presence over the period of the program. However, by 2020, a reduction in donor
grants to the budget by about 50 percent (to 27 percent of central government expenditure) is
envisaged. Shifts in budgetary allocations to national security could have negative
implications for social indicators, due to more limited poverty reduction-related expenditure.
5.
An improvement in basic security could generate a “peace dividend” for
economic activity. With improved security, activity across sectors should benefit, foreign
direct investment (including in telecommunications) could increase, and there is a possibility
that tourism picks up. Moreover, a “brain gain” for the local economy (both private and
public sectors) could result from the reversal of the “brain drain” seen over the past decade.
These domestic factors could be complemented by external developments, despite the decline
in exports to nonresidents entailed by transition and transformation. Over the longer term,
exports could get a boost from enhancing regional trade, including through the development
of regional transportation links. Government imports will continue to be aligned with importrelated fiscal expenditures, reflecting the decline in these aggregates.
Alternative Scenarios
6.
Two alternative scenarios illustrate the sensitivity of the baseline scenario to its
main assumptions. The sequential transition and transformation periods represent two
phases in Afghanistan’s future economic development that can be shocked. The first
alternative scenario examines the sensitivity of the framework to a lower growth outlook,
with the negative impact of transition/transformation on growth being larger than assumed in
the baseline. The second alternative scenario evaluates the economy’s prospects under more
rapid donor grant withdrawal than during the transformation phase.
7.
In a “lower growth” scenario, transition and transformation could have a more
negative effect on growth than assumed in the baseline. Given the limited information on
local content and multipliers, there is considerable uncertainty about the impact of transition
and transformation on growth. The “lower growth” scenario traces the macroeconomic
effects of transition and transformation, reducing growth by an additional 4–5 percentage
points compared to the baseline. This would lead to lower fiscal revenues which would
reduce the government’s resource envelope, putting crucial security and development
spending at risk, potentially leading to further adverse growth effects. In response to this,
donors are assumed to increase grants to the development budget in subsequent years.
8.
In a “faster donor withdrawal” scenario, a swifter donor exit in the
transformation period compromises development spending and ultimately growth. In
this case, grants to the external and development budgets decrease at a faster rate than in the
baseline, while the handover of security expenditures remains the same. The assumption is
that donors maintain the funding of national security forces while divesting resources in the
broader economy. Part of this process of withdrawal involves moving large operations and
maintenance expenditures onto the budget. This leads to rapidly rising fiscal deficits,

87
reflecting spiraling expenditures and lagging revenue efforts due to a loss of donor support
for vital reforms. Pressures will mount rapidly as the government will be forced to choose
between its security and various development priorities.
9.
In both alternative scenarios, the government can create some fiscal space
through borrowing, but this is unlikely to provide a full offset. Once the government has
introduced domestic securities (sukuks), it can tap the domestic banks for financing, though
the cumulative scope is limited even under a regime of financial repression. Access to
external borrowing is also likely to be limited, though it is not constrained for the sake of
exposition in the alternative scenarios. As the debt sustainability analysis shows, Afghanistan
is at high risk of debt distress, and should restrict any borrowing to highly concessional
financing for specific projects with a clearly identified economic return.6 There will also be
risks to the monetary outlook should pressure be applied to the central bank to monetize
government deficit (“fiscal dominance”).
10.
Lastly, a scenario in which security deteriorates rapidly could have devastating
economic consequences, but this is not modeled here. A destabilization in security
represents the worst possible equilibrium for Afghanistan. Adequate and effective levels of
security spending are a necessary condition for maintaining stability and potentially
generating improvements which would spillover to economic development.
An Upside Scenario: “Transition Dividend”
11.
Donors can provide additional stimulus to the Afghan economy by moving
support on budget. Donors could transfer part of the funds spent on maintaining their
contributions to the ISAF military architecture to development within Afghanistan. A number
of donors are also considering channeling a larger share of their support through the budget
even as the overall grant envelope declines. Taken together, a “transition dividend” could be
generated leading to higher growth. According to case studies, the local content of donor
spending is in the range of 20–25 percent, while the local content of on-budget development
spending is 30–35 percent. Thus, by moving a share of the external budget (both security and
development)––currently about 30 percent of GDP––on budget, donors would provide an
extra stimulus to the local economy. For example, shifting 5 percent of GDP in grants on
budget would boost GDP growth by ½ of a percentage point or more, depending on the size
of the multiplier. Such a shift may imply a somewhat lower quality of the built capital stock.
At the same time, operating and maintaining a more indigenous capital stock would be more
affordable in light of the government's limited resources.

6

In all scenarios, the interest rate on domestic borrowing is held constant at 5 percent throughout whole period.

88
Figure 1. Afghanistan: Alternative Growth Scenarios
9.0

900

Real GDP Growth
(in percent)

8.0

GDP per capita
(in U.S. dollars)

800

7.0
700

6.0
5.0

600
4.0
500

3.0

Baseline

2.0

0.0
2010/11

2.0

2012/13

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

Low growth

400

Baseline
Low growth
High O&M and low grants

1.0

High O&M and low grants

300
2010/11

2020/21

Overall Fiscal Balance
(in percent of GDP, incl. grants)

-2.0

2.0

-4.0

0.0

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

2020/21

Current Account Balance
(in percent of GDP, incl. grants)

4.0

0.0

2012/13

Baseline
Low growth
High O&M and low grants

-6.0
-2.0

-8.0

-4.0

-10.0
-12.0

Baseline
Low growth
High O&M and low grants

-14.0

-6.0
-8.0

-16.0

-10.0

-18.0
2010/11

2012/13

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

Foreign Official Grants
(in millions of U.S. dollars)

7,000

2010/11

2020/21

80.0

6,000

70.0

5,500

60.0

5,000

50.0

4,500

40.0

4,000

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

2020/21

2018/19

2020/21

Public Debt
(in percent of GDP)

90.0

6,500

2012/13

Baseline
Low growth
High O&M and low grants

30.0

Baseline

3,500

Low growth

20.0

3,000

High O&M and low grants

10.0

2,500

0.0
2010/11

2012/13

Source: IMF staff simulations

2014/15

2016/17

2018/19

2020/21

2010/11

2012/13

2014/15

2016/17

89

APPENDIX III. FISCAL SURVIVAL AND FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY
This annex discusses alternative fiscal scenarios as the government takes over donor
financed activities and certain recurrent costs of donor financed investments. In the near
term, fiscal survival is likely to become the key operating principle as the government takes
over spending currently financed by donors and balances this with development spending
needs while exploring options of how to generate additional fiscal space. Indeed, the need to
take over donor-financed spending is likely to push back fiscal sustainability—defined as
domestic revenues covering total operating expenditures—to 2024/25.
1.
Afghanistan remains heavily reliant on donor grants within multiple budget
streams (Figure 1). As of 2010/11, the central government’s operating budget is 49 percent
grant-financed, and the development budget is 59 percent grant-financed. This is in addition
to a large donor-funded external budget estimated at 30 percent of GDP in 2010/11.
Domestic revenues at present pay for only 52 percent of central government expenditures.
Figure 1. Afghanistan: Sources and Uses of Funds

Public Spending in FY2010/11
USD 8.1bn
52 percent of GDP

Nonsecurity1

Security

Development2

USD 1.1bn
7 percent of GDP

USD 3.5bn
22 percent of GDP

USD 3.6bn
23 percent of GDP

Operating Budget
Security

Nonsecurity

USD 1.3bn
8 percent of GDP

USD 1.1bn
7 percent of GDP

USD 0.9bn
6 percent of GDP

Security

Development

USD 2.2bn
14 percent of GDP

USD 2.6bn
17 percent of GDP

Security

Nonsecurity

Discretionary

Nondiscretionary

USD 0.8bn
5 percent of GDP

USD 0.3bn
2 percent of GDP

USD 0.2bn
1 percent of GDP

USD 0.4bn
2 percent of GDP

Grants to Operating Budget

Grants to Development Budget

USD 1.6bn
11 percent of GDP

USD 6.5bn
41 percent of GDP

Domestic Revenues

Grants

1 This

External Budget3

Development Budget

category covers spending on education, health and all other nonsecurity sectors across government.

2 Development expenditures include significant noncapital security spending, e.g. private protection companies.
3 Estimated local

spending content (‘cash impact’) of external budget. 100 percent donor-financed.

External
Budget Grants

90
2.
The government faces a tough balancing act as international engagement
gradually declines to more normal levels. Over the next five years and beyond, fiscal
policy needs to find ways to balance the takeover of externally-financed security spending
and other expenditures, while increasing propoor and development outlays within a tight
budget constraint. In this context, the concept of fiscal sustainability is reduced to one of
fiscal survival in the short term as the limited availability of government resources will
dictate the capacity to absorb operating expenditures, while continuing to fund necessary
development priorities.
3.
Revenue effort is the backbone of fiscal survival. The government has achieved
impressive improvements in revenue collections in the space of five years (a quadrupling in
absolute terms between 2005/06 and 2010/11). Realizing further gains depends heavily on
the speed and determination with which the fiscal reform agenda is implemented as well as
exogenous political and economic developments, e.g., border disputes with neighbors. Two
key future sources of revenues include the introduction of a Value Added Tax (VAT) and the
opening of the Aynak and Hajigak mines, both of which are projected to generate additional
revenues by 2014/15. The VAT, in particular, is estimated to boost revenue effort by close to
2 percent of GDP at inception, while the mining sector will eventually add an additional
1 percent of GDP per year to revenues once the mines become fully operational.
4.
The speed and extent of the transition process is the key determinant of the need
to finance security spending from budget resources. At present, security-related grants are
assumed to peak in 2013/14 in absolute terms, but peak as a percentage of total security
expenditures in the current fiscal year. Given the overarching importance of maintaining and
improving security, the government will have to dedicate significant resources in this area.
The exact trajectory of support from the international community, including via grants from
the NATO Training Missions - Afghanistan (NTM-A) and the Law and Order Trust Fund
Afghanistan (LOTFA), will—in the short run—determine how much fiscal space the
government has for other spending priorities.
5.
Given the expected security spending needs, the government believes that it will
have to contain nonsecurity expenditure growth to 10 percent per annum over the three
years of the program. As a result, nonsecurity wages (in critical propoor areas such as
education and health) are set to decline as a percentage of GDP from 4.6 percent in
2011/12 to 4.3 percent in 2013/14. Though clearly undesirable, whether this is a feasible



Due to the magnitude of on- and off-budget contributions, the government would only take over a fraction of
total externally-financed spending. This is likely to comprise ongoing support to existing projects alongside new
priority spending.

91
trajectory depends partly on the interplay between pay and grade reforms (covering also
pensions) and the rate of recruitment in to the civil service (“Tashkeel”).
6.
Growing operations and maintenance (O&M) costs constitute another source of
spending pressures. As donor-financed development projects are surrendered to the Afghan
government, the tight resource envelope means that the government will have to evaluate the
viability of the existing capital stock (e.g., roads, schools, hospitals, bridges, etc.) put in place
by donors.
7.
Taken together, these developments suggest that fiscal sustainability can be
achieved only by 2024/25 in the baseline scenario. Grants to the central government budget
are projected to peak in percent of GDP in FY2012/13, and decline thereafter, together with
an ongoing gradual decline in the external budget. The government is assumed to take over
some minimal O&M, but many donor projects would be allowed to depreciate. 5 The baseline
assumes that the significant O&M costs from the security sector will continue to be borne by
donors. There is insufficient information to quantify these security-related O&M costs which
cover a number of categories, including vehicle and equipment maintenance, training,
utilities for military bases, fuel costs, etc. ISAF continues to evaluate the overall cost of
operations that would need to be transferred to the government. Recent estimates have seen
downward revisions from US$7 billion to US$3.5 billion.
8.
Alternative scenarios are modeled to gauge the sensitivity of these projections to
key assumptions. First, the decline in donor grants to both the development and external
budgets is accelerated. The resulting profile for O&M is plotted in Figure 2. O&M costs are
seen to decline faster (as the number of projects that generate O&M expenses declines). As


There are significant costs in the pipeline in the nonsecurity sector. Apart from the structurally important pay
and grade reforms, there are the potentially large replacement costs of the “second civil service”––the
absorption onto the government payroll of those civil servants paid for by donors (e.g., UNDP, World Bank,
etc.) at wages many multiples higher than the standard Tashkeel salaries. This would be on top of existing
pressures from the natural and targeted recruitment rates for the civil service, particularly in the health and
education sectors.



Projects have been undertaken across Afghanistan by both military and civilian assistance teams. In the case
of the former, ISAF’s Provincial Reconstruction Teams and Commanders’ Emergency Response Programs have
invested significant resources in the local communities by providing a mixture of assets. These projects are
designed to generate ‘goodwill’ but can sometimes produce assets which the provincial communities are unable
to maintain.


The latter assumption encapsulates the continued impetus to move certain expenditures onto the central
government budget, while the former captures the government’s growing requirement to finance domestic
expenditures on its own terms, be it revenues or additional borrowing.

5

O&M costs eventually decline as a proportion of GDP as development expenditures fall and capital
accumulation declines. In this way, O&M is “self-limiting” in the long run.

92
can be seen, in each case fiscal sustainability is delayed from 2024/25 to beyond the longterm horizon.
Figure 2. Afghanistan: Operations and Maintenance Costs under Baseline and
Alternative Scenario with Rapid Decline in Donor Grants
(In percent of GDP)
Baseline Operating Expenditures
Baseline Operating Expenditures Plus O&M Costs
Alternative (Accelerated Donor Withdrawal) Operating Expenditures Plus O&M Costs
Domestic Revenues
30

30

26

26

22

22

18

18

14

14

10
2011/12

10
2014/15

2017/18

2020/21

2023/24

2026/27

2029/30

Source: Fund staff estimates.

9.
In the case of declining grants, it is possible that development expenditures could
also decline as donor funds dry up and the government is unable to take them over. The
result would be a premature halt in infrastructure investment. On the other hand, should
development spending be maintained and increasingly financed by the government as donors
withdraw, government borrowing would increase beyond levels needed to cover O&M as
well as any existing government overhang from the operating budget. This could trigger a
potentially dangerous debt dynamic (see the accompanying debt sustainability analysis).
10.
In a second scenario, the rate of depreciation of capital is raised to reflect the
fact that donor-financed projects, which are further away from the central government
budget, are less likely to be maintained. Figure 3 shows again how operating expenditures
increase significantly, delaying fiscal sustainability to beyond 2030/31.

93
Figure 3. Afghanistan: Operations and Maintenance Costs under Alternative
Baselines with 5 Percent, 10 Percent, and 20 Percent Depreciation
(In percent of GDP)

Baseline Operating Expenditures
Operating Expenditures Plus O&M Costs (5 percent Depreciation)
Operating Expenditures Plus O&M Costs (10 percent Depreciation)
Operating Expenditures Plus O&M Costs (20 percent Depreciation)
Domestic Revenues

30

30

25

25

20

20

15

15

10
2011/12

10
2013/14

2015/16

2017/18

2019/20

2021/22

2023/24

2025/26

2027/28

2029/30

Source: Fund staff estimates.

11.
Fiscal survival translates into the government ensuring that their revenue and
spending paths are consistent with a predictable, and ideally gradual, reduction of
grants to both the central government and external budgets. However, as the mediumterm strategy for transition and transformation remains unclear, the overall nature of the
donor footprint remains unpredictable. As the simulations show, even conservative estimates
for O&M costs from the nonsecurity sector alone will require difficult decisions from the
government dictated by the constraints of fiscal survival.



Donor support is typically uncertain, as plans are established on an annual basis and depend on national
appropriations processes, in consultation with the Afghan government. However, the economic and political
uncertainty surrounding transition has lowered predictability of the donor stance to an even greater extent.

94
Box 1. Estimating Operations and Maintenance Costs
The potential impact of taking on budget O&M related to donor projects is modeled based on assumptions
about the accumulation of a public sector capital stock.1 The trajectory of capital accumulation over time
depends on assumptions about grants and the central government and external budgets.
Investment in year t, It , can be viewed as a function of the capital expenditure components of the operating,
development and external budgets as follows:
It = OBK,t + θ1DBt + θ2EBt ,
where OBK,t is the capital expenditure component (code 25) of the operating budget for year t; DBt , is
development spending in year t (covering spending on all ANDS priorities), and EBt captures the external
budget in year t. θ1 and θ2 are parameters which determine the proportion of the development and external
budgets which goes toward building the public capital stock. The reason for assuming only a fraction is that it is
very likely that these budgets include several noncapital expenditures, in particular related to the provision of
security for donor projects. In addition, donor-financed spending is typically priced at international prices rather
than Afghan price levels, such that actual costs are inflated. Ministries have also been known to use the
development budget for some elements of current spending, while other unwanted costs could include wages
and salaries of consultants hired to oversee projects. Therefore it is necessary to make adjustments to strip out
these recurrent costs.
Investment then feeds in to a standard dynamic capital accumulation equation:
Kt = (1 – δ)Kt-1 + It ,
Where δ captures the rate of depreciation of the capital stock, in this case the donor projects established in
Afghanistan. The final step of the estimation involves an assumption as to the proportion, γt , of these capital
outlays each year that needs to be financed in order to keep them running (operations and maintenance costs):
O&Mt = γtKt .
The parameters δ and γt capture assumptions about the rate at which the capital stock will erode and those assets
which are actually needed by the country respectively. In the case of depreciation, the further away projects are
from the oversight and control of the Afghan budget, i.e., the less ‘ownership’ by the government, the higher the
rate of depreciation that can be assumed. For example, maintenance on projects executed under the external
budget are more likely to be neglected, compared to those undertaken at the discretion of the government. The
proportion of capital expenditure that actually accounts for O&M is related to the needs of the country. The
higher the variable, γt , the higher the perceived need for the existing project. However, there are question marks
over whether donor-determined needs for Afghanistan, and those determined by the authorities will always
coincide.
________________________
1

The framework used was developed by Steven Symansky under projects financed by FS Share/USAID, the US Treasury,
and Adam Smith International/DFID.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN
Staff Report for the 2011 Article IV Consultation and
Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under the Extended Credit Facility
Informational Annex
Prepared by the Middle East and Central Asia Department
November 2, 2011

Contents

Page

I. Relations with the Fund ........................................................................................................2
II. Relations with the World Bank ............................................................................................7
III. Implementation of the Joint Management Action Plan on Bank-Fund Collaboration ......9
IV. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ....................................................................12
V. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................................14

2

ANNEX I. ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN—RELATIONS WITH THE FUND
(As of September 30, 2011)
I.

Membership Status: Joined July 14, 1955; Article XIV.

II.

General Resources Account
Quota
Fund holdings of currency
Reserve position in Fund
Notes issuance
Holdings Exchange Rate

III.

SDR Department

Outstanding Purchases and Loans
ECF Arrangements

V.

1

% Quota

161.90
161.92
0.00

100.00
100.01
0.00

SDR Million

Net cumulative allocation
Holdings
IV.

SDR Million

% Allocation

155.31
128.29

100.00
82.60

SDR Million

% Quota

75.35

46.54

Latest Financial Arrangements:
Type

Date of
Arrangement

Expiration Date
(SDR Million)

Amount Approved

Amount Drawn
(SDR Million)

ECF1

Jun 26, 2006

Sep 25, 2010

81.00

75.35

Formerly PRGF.

VI.

Projected Payments to Fund
(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs)
Forthcoming
2011
Principal
Charges/Interest
Total

0.02
0.02

2012
2.45
0.26
2.71

2013
8.29
0.24
8.53

2014
12.81
0.22
13.03

2015
14.51
0.21
14.71

3

VII.

Implementation of HIPC Initiative:
Enhanced
Framework

I. Commitment of HIPC assistance
Decision point date
Assistance committed by all creditors (US$ million, NPV)1
Of which: IMF assistance (US$ million)
(SDR equivalent in millions)
Completion point date
II. Disbursement of IMF assistance (SDR million)
Assistance disbursed to the member
Interim assistance
Completion point balance
Additional disbursement of interest income2
Total disbursements
__________________

Jul 2007
582.40
--Jan 2010
-----

1

Net Present Value (NPV) at the decision point under the enhanced framework.
Under the enhanced framework, an additional disbursement is made at the completion point corresponding to
interest income earned on the amount committed at the decision point, but not disbursed during the interim
period.

2

VIII.

Implementation of MDRI Assistance: Not Applicable
Nonfinancial Relations

IX.

Exchange Arrangement

Afghanistan is an Article XIV member country. The authorities are implementing a liberal
exchange system. Based on information currently available to the staff, no exchange
restrictions and multiple currency practices are in place. The authorities have provided
documents to Fund staff related to laws and regulations on the exchange regime and have
requested technical assistance from the Fund to formalize the current liberal regime. They
have been implementing a managed float system with no predetermined path for the
exchange rate. On September 30, 2011, the average of the buying and selling exchange rates
in cash transactions on the Kabul money exchange market was 48.3925 Afghanis per
U.S. dollar.
To conduct monetary policy, the authorities rely on foreign exchange auctions since
May 2002, and on short-term capital note auctions since September 2004. The foreign
exchange auctions were initially open only to licensed money changers, but since
June 2005 they are also open to commercial banks. The capital note auctions are open to
commercial banks. Auctions are linked to the overall monetary program and are held on a
regular basis.

4

X.

Article IV Consultation

The last Article IV consultation with Afghanistan was discussed by the Executive Board on
February 13, 2008. Article IV consultation with Afghanistan are held in accordance with the
decision on consultation cycles approved on July 15, 2002.
XI.

Safeguards Assessment

Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) was
subject to a safeguards assessment with respect to the ECF arrangement approved on
June 26, 2006. An initial safeguards assessment of the DAB was completed on
June 12, 2006 and updated on March 18, 2008. The initial assessment revealed serious
vulnerabilities in the DAB’s external and internal audit mechanisms, as well as in its
financial reporting framework and system of internal controls. An update safeguards
assessment is currently in progress in the context of a proposed new ECF arrangement. A
safeguards mission visited the DAB in July 2010 and found that safeguards risks had been
addressed in several areas, although risks remain. The DAB implemented the majority of the
previous safeguards recommendations, strengthening its external audit mechanism, financial
reporting and accounting controls. Progress in establishing an effective internal audit
function continues to be slow, however, and governance oversight should be enhanced. New
risks have also emerged over the last year as a result of the Kabul Bank crisis, not least due to
capacity constraints, resignation of the governor and strains on central bank autonomy. The
central bank is working with IMF staff to complete the update assessment and is committed
to implementing its recommendations.
XII.

Technical Assistance, 2006–11

Department
FAD

Dates
February 2004–May 2006
February 21–28, 2006
March 1–4, 2006
April 30–May 9, 2006
November 14–23, 2006
October 23–November 27, 2008
July 4–16, 2009
December 2–12, 2009
December 6–16, 2009
April 3–17, 2010
April 6–19, 2010
June 6–19, 2010
September 14–27, 2010
October 16-28, 2010
January 22-February 4,2011

Purpose
Treasury Advisor
Public Financial Management (budget and treasury
procedures)
Public Financial Management (budget and treasury
procedures)
Tax Policy Mission
Tax and Customs Administration
Resident Public Financial Management Advisor
Organizational structure
Revenue administration
Program budgeting reform
Revenue Administration (Customs)
Program budgeting reform
Revenue Administration (Customs)
Tax Policy Reform
Public Financial Management (with METAC)
Customs Administration

5
April 1–13, 2011
September 15-22, 2011

LEG
MCD
MCM

STA

December 2011
May 2–10, 2006
May 27–28, 2010
August 29, 2011–present
September 2004–April, 2006
January 22–February 5, 2006
April 2006–June 2007
May 2–11, 2006
November 28–December 10,
2006
March 19–April 16, 2007
March 24–29, 2007
April 17–30, 2007
November 7–14, 2007
January 13–21, 2008
August 27-September 11, 2008
August 2009
June 20-24, 2010
September 2010 –present
October 25-November 4, 2010
February 7-14, 2011
July 24-27, 2011
October 1–12, 2011
November 13-17, 2011
December 10-15, 2011
October 31, 2005–January 12,
2006
March 6–15, 2006
March 8–May 2, 2006
March 13–22, 2006
May 24–July 18, 2006
August 2–16, 2006
August 8–October 3, 2006
September 22–October 4, 2006
November 1–December 26, 2006
November 5–19, 2006
April 22–May 4, 2007
July 7–30, 2007
August 29–September 13, 2007
September 09–October 05, 2007
December 02–13, 2007
April 20–30, 2008
August 6–27, 2008
October 13–29, 2008
November 12–December 3, 2008
November 23–December 5, 2008

Customs Administration
Program Budgeting
Revenue Administration (VAT implementation PLANNED)
Legal framework for monetary and payment systems
Islamic banking law
Resident monetary policy and banking advisor
Training coordinator
Monetary policy
Training coordinator (peripatetic)
Monetary policy, foreign reserve management, money
markets
Monetary policy formulation and implementation
Central bank capacity building
Banking supervision
Monetary policy formulation and implementation
Banking supervision
Banking law (with LEG)
Monetary policy formulation and implementation
Monetary operations
Debt/money markets, sukuks (with METAC)
Resident advisor on Banking Resolution
Banking crisis management (with MCD)
Banking crisis management (with MCD)
Islamic Finance (sukuk workshop)
Banking supervision
Islamic Banking (PLANNED)
Banking regulations (PLANNED)
Multisector statistics
Balance of payments statistics
Multisector statistics
Monetary and financial statistics
Multisector Statistics
Balance of payments statistics
Multisector statistics
Government finance statistics
Multisector statistics
Monetary and financial statistics
Monetary and financial statistics
National accounts
Government finance statistics
National accounts
National accounts
Monetary and financial statistics
Balance of payments statistics
National accounts
Balance of payments statistics
Monetary and financial statistics

6

METAC

August 30-September 9, 2009
September 27–October 07, 2009
September 18–29, 2010
September 20-October 1, 2010
October 23-November 3, 2011
December 12-23, 2011
May 2006
June 8–13, 2006
September 2006
November, 2006
November 15–22, 2006
December 12–19, 2006
December 12–22, 2006
March 10–21, 2007
March 11–22, 2007
March 24–29, 2007
May 19–25, 2007
June 6–19, 2007
July 1–12, 2007
August 2007
September 1–12, 2007
November 4–8, 2007
January 5–26, 2008
March 22–April 2, 2008
June 25–July 7, 2008
August 24–27, 2008
September 14–24, 2008
December 14–17, 2008
January 25–February 2, 2009
January 28–February 2, 2009
March 7–19, 2009
February 13-24, 2010
May 17-28, 2010
June 20-30, 2010
September 19-30, 2010
January 2-11, 2011
January 10-14, 2011
August 2-4, 2011
November 12-21, 2011

Monetary and financial statistics
Balance of payments statistics
Government Finance Statistics
National Accounts Statistics
Monetary Statistics
National Accounts Statistics (PLANNED)
Treasury modernization (Resident treasury advisor)
Budget integration
Banking supervision (Training)
Price statistics (Training)
Tax policy and administration
Budget integration
Budget development
Tax policy and administration
Cash management
Banking supervision
Balance of payments statistics
Accounting
Banking supervision
Cash management and program budgeting
Banking supervision
Banking supervision
Central bank accounting
Banking supervision
Budget preparation
Banking supervision
Real sector statistics
Banking supervision
Central bank accounting
Tax policy and administration
Cash and budget management
Public Financial Management
Consumer price index
Banking Supervision (with MCM)
Customs Reform
Financial Planning, Budget Classification
Tax Information Systems (workshop)
Consumer price statistics
Consumer price statistics (PLANNED)

Afghanistan is a participant in the Middle East Technical Assistance Center.
XIII.

Resident Representatives

Mr. de Schaetzen; August 2002–June 2005
Mr. Charap; June 2005–June 2008
Mr. Abdallah; June 2008–present

7
ANNEX II. ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN—RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK
(As of September 22, 2011)
1.
IDA has committed a total of over US$2.3 billion to Afghanistan since 2002. To date,
25 development and emergency reconstruction projects including 3 development policy
grants have been implemented. IDA's active portfolio comprises 24 investment projects with
combined net commitment of over 1.2 billion, of which almost 50 percent
(US$536.1 million) has been disbursed.
2.
The Bank’s involvement in Afghanistan extends to its role as administrator of the
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF). The ARTF has developed into the primary
multi-donor funding mechanism, financing the essential running costs of government as well
as key investments, including national programs in health, education, rural access, irrigation
rehabilitation, microfinance, and the National Solidarity Program. Since early 2002,
32 donors have contributed over US$4.3 billion to this fund, making it the largest contributor
to the Afghan budget for both operating costs and development programs.
3.
In January 2010, the World Bank's International Development Association (IDA) and
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) agreed to support debt relief for Afghanistan. The
Boards of both institutions agreed that Afghanistan had taken the necessary steps to reach the
completion point under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
This will generate total debt service savings of US$1.6 billion, which include US$1.3 billion
from the HIPC Initiative, US$260 million from Paris Club creditors beyond HIPC, and
US$38.4 million from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI).
4.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC), the World Bank Group’s private sector
development arm, continues to work with its investment partners in Afghanistan. IFC now
has an investment portfolio totaling more than US$90 million in six companies. This includes
commitments in the financial, telecom, hospitality and healthcare sectors.
5.
One of the primary focuses of the Bank's assistance has been to help the government
with legal and regulatory reform, establishing fiscal authority, and developing systems and
human resources for public financial management and the civil service as a whole. The
performance of the Ministry of Finance regarding alignment of budgetary allocations with
the country's priority needs, fiscal discipline, cash control, and aggregate transparency has
contributed to macroeconomic stability and sustained external donor assistance.
6.
In rural development, the National Solidarity Program (NSP) has reached over
18 million Afghans in approximately 28,000 communities across rural Afghanistan through
locally elected community development councils. With modest grants, the communities are
empowered to make decisions about their own development priorities in drinking water
supply, roads, irrigation, schools, etc. To date, NSP has financed 57,400 community
infrastructure projects of which 46,000 have been completed.

8
7.
With support of the World Bank, the Ministry of Public Health improved health
service coverage through financing 432 health care facilities in 18 provinces between
2003 and 2009. This has contributed to a 28 percent decline in the under-5 years-old
mortality rate. Health service utilization increased among project area populations from a rate
of 0.3 consultations per capita annually at the outset to 1.44 per capita by mid-2009.
8.
The demand for education has continuously exceeded expectations and supply
capacity. There are now 7 million children enrolled in schools, with nearly 40 percent being
girls, compared to a little more than one million seven years ago, with almost no girls.
9.
Since the implementation of an Automated System for Customs Data, the collection
of transit fees in major transit corridors in Afghanistan has improved and customs revenues
have increased from US$50 million in 2004 to US$700 million in 2010. To date, customs
processes have been automated at major Inland Customs Depots, including at the Kabul
Airport which receives approximately 55 percent of all the country's customs declarations.
10.
The Bank is helping to build the capacity of the government to exercise strong
oversight of the minerals and hydrocarbons sectors. Private sector investment has been
facilitated through the successful tender of the Aynak copper deposit, one of the largest such
deposits in the world. The total amount of the investment will be around US$10 billion over
the next 5-10 years, and an initial payment of US$80 million has been received by the
Government.
11.
Looking forward, the Bank’s indicative lending envelope for 2011–12 is
approximately US$290 million. Resources will be primarily channeled to private and
financial sector development as well as proven national programs in education and rural
livelihood (including agriculture), where demands remain vast, to sustain and accelerate
progress made so far. These areas constitute significant platforms for improving livelihoods
and building government credibility.
12.
Supporting sound national programs under the leadership of the government is the
most effective use of international aid. The Bank will engage in areas where there is
evidence: (i) that a strong, reform-minded, leadership is in place; (ii) where it can help
leverage the support of other members of the international donor community, and (iii) where
opportunities exist to develop operational frameworks for future programs. In this context,
the Government has requested that the Bank play an enhanced role in working with them to
determine the vision, design, and framework of their national programs.

9
ANNEX III. ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN––IMPLEMENTATION OF THE JOINT
MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN ON BANK-FUND COLLABORATION
(AS OF OCTOBER 19, 2011)
1.
Joint Management Action Plan (JMAP). This memorandum, endorsed by
Mr. Schimmelpfennig (IMF mission chief) and Mr. Krafft (World Bank country director),
documents the annual consultations between Afghanistan country teams of the World Bank
and the IMF, undertaken under the JMAP. Discussions were held on September 29 in
Washington and October 5, 2011 in Kabul.
2.
Bank’s work during the past year. The Bank has supported the Government with a
wide array of projects comprising the development of broad-based education and health
services, the reconstruction of infrastructure, provision of rural infrastructure, technical
assistance to the mining sector as well as structural reforms in public administration, and
customs administration and the financial system. Sector specific activities aside, the World
Bank work interfaced with the Fund’s engagement in several areas: the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF)-funded Incentive Program assisted the Government in
strengthening the Public Financial System (e.g., through issuing a new audit law), improving
oversight mechanisms, accelerating reforms in public administration, and increasing
domestic revenues through custom reforms. A new financial sector project was approved
following the Kabul Bank crisis which will, among other things, finance audits of 10 banks.
The World Bank also provided technical assistance and analytical work on a number of
fronts including a debt management performance assessment, notes on sub-national finance
reforms and a poverty profile. Moreover, the World Bank is undertaking a major piece of
analysis on the impact of the “transition process” on the outlook for fiscal sustainability,
poverty and long term economic growth.
3.
Fund’s work during the past year. The Fund focused its efforts on helping the
authorities resolve the Kabul Bank crisis and safeguard financial sector stability. An action
plan has been developed with a goal to minimize fiscal costs of the crisis, protect the banking
system, promote transparency, reduce moral hazard, strengthen banking supervision, and
improve the legal and regulatory framework. The plan is currently being implemented. The
authorities made progress on a set of measures and prior action and, accordingly, a staff-level
agreement on a new ECF-supported program was reached on October 6, 2011. In its advice,
the Fund emphasized the need to preserve fiscal sustainability and offered recommendations
to that effect. Finally, between October 2010 and September 2011, the Fund has fielded over
10 technical assistance missions, including on banking resolution, financial sector
supervision, public financial management, tax policy, revenue administration, Islamic
finance and statistics.
4.
Bank-Fund collaboration during the past year proceeded according to the last
JMAP. Both institutions worked closely on the strategy to resolve the Kabul Bank crisis as
well as on issues related to macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability. As noted above,

10
in support of Fund conditionality the Bank Board approved a new financial sector investment
to finance audits of ten banks. The Fund shared its macroeconomic projections with the
Bank, as requested.
5.
Key medium- and long-term objectives. Staffs exchanged views on the main
medium- and long-term economic priorities and challenges facing Afghanistan. The key
areas identified during the previous JMAP period remain valid––they are: (i) sustaining
macroeconomic and financial stability; (ii) preserving fiscal sustainability and improving
prioritization and management of expenditures; (iii) reducing red tape and promoting private
sector development and trade; (iv) harnessing mineral resources for development; and
(v) ensuring rule of law, reducing corruption and improving governance.
6.
The challenge of “transition.” That notwithstanding, the most important short- and
medium-term challenge is proper management of the “transition” process. Transition entails
an accelerated reduction of the international military presence by 2014, and a timeline for
rationalization (scaling down) of donors’ assistance. Accordingly, the government of
Afghanistan is expected to provide for an increasing share of security expenditures from its
domestic revenues and gradually take full responsibility for its development agenda.
7.
Bank–Fund Collaboration. The teams agreed to the following cross-support and
exchange of information:
 The teams agreed to continue to share and consult at the early stage, on their
envisaged program conditionality and benchmarks, and to ensure that these conditions are
complementary and mutually reinforcing;
The teams agreed to continue to support each other in those aspects of the respective
work programs that lay in the scope of leadership and expertise of the other institution.
Particularly, the Bank will support the Fund in the area of banking sector audits, payment
systems, anti-money laundering, mining, social spending and other structural reforms,
while the Fund will share with the Bank macroeconomic data and projections as well as
its assessment of macroeconomic policies. Both institutions will work collaboratively on
better understanding the economic consequences of transition and the appropriate policies
to mitigate any negative impact;
 The teams further agreed to participate in each other’s formal and informal review
processes as requested and to exchange information as necessary.
8.
Table 1 below lists the teams’ separate and joint work program for October 2011–
September 2012

11
Table 1. Afghanistan: Bank’s and Fund’s Planned Activities in the Area of
Joint Interest, October 2011–September 2012
Products
Fund Article IV Consultation

Preparations/Mission
Timing1
October 2011

Delivery1
November
2011

Extended Credit Facility (ECF, new
arrangement)

October 2011

November
2011

First Review under the ECF

April 2012

May 2012

Areas of Technical Assistance:
Banking restructuring, financial sector supervision, revenue administration, customs and border
management, tax policy, public financial management, foreign exchange regulation, AML/CFT,
banking law, treasury securities, statistics (national accounts, prices, government finance,
monetary, balance of payments, GDDS)
Bank Development Policy Grant

November 2011–May 2012

May 2012

Financial Sector Strengthening Project,
Supervision

November 2011–August 2012

October
2011

ARTF IP Program (SY 1391), Preparation of
MoU

November 2011–March 2012

March 2012

Study: Transition and Sustainability in
Afghanistan

Throughout 2010/11

December
2011

Study: Long Term Sources Economic Growth

TBD

Policy Notes: Sub-National Finance

January 2012–June 2013

June 2013

Position Note: Management of Mineral
Revenues

Throughout 2010/11

February
2013

Economic Monitoring

Continuous

Joint Financial Sector Assessment Program

1

TBD

AML/CFT follow-up and workshop

November 2011

Dialogue on Mineral Revenue and Expenditure
Management

TBD

Dialogue on the transition process

Continuous

Strengthening of the banking sector

Continuous

Improving payment systems

Continuous

Timing is tentative.

TBD

12
ANNEX IV. ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN—RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN
DEVELOPMENT BANK
(As of September 25, 2011)
1.
A new Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covering the 2009–2013 period was
endorsed by ADB's Board of Directors on March 5, 2009. The new CPS is fully aligned with
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS), with ADB's investments
contributing to Afghanistan's further economic development. The new CPS continues ADB's
narrow focus on Afghanistan's energy, transport, and agriculture and irrigation sectors,
including sector governance and further institutional and human capacity development.
2.
As of end-August2011 the Asian Development Bank had committed an aggregate of
some US$2.21 billion to Afghanistan's reconstruction through approved Asian Development
Fund (ADF) loan- and grant-financed projects, technical assistance activities, donor grantfinanced projects administered by ADB, and ADB private sector investments. Since 2007, all
of ADB's public sector (ADF) assistance has been provided on a 100 percent grant basis. At
the June 2008 International Conference in Support of Afghanistan, ADB pledged an
additional US$1.3 billion over the 2008–2013 period, making ADB Afghanistan's fourth
largest donor to Afghanistan (after the United States, the United Kingdom, and the World
Bank).
3.
Since November 2008, ADB has approved three multi-tranche financing facility
(MFF) projects as follows, a US$570 million energy sector MFF and a US$400 million
transport sector MFF (November 2008); a US$300 million water resources management
sector MFF (October 2009); and a railway project of US$165 million (October 2009). With
the approval of these MFFs and the railway project, the bulk of ADB's anticipated ADF
assistance over the 2008–2013 will be fully "earmarked", although with some flexibility
depending on changes in Government priorities.
4.
Since ADB operations in Afghanistan resumed in 2002, there have been 11 public
sector loans in total US$722.2 million and 14 grants in total US$963.1 million covering
23 investment projects. This involved ADF funding resources using loan or combined loan
and grant funding, and since 2007 all projects have used only ADF grant-financing. In
addition, there have been 10 Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction funded projects, 8 standalone
projects, and 2 combined with loan projects totaling US$110.0 million. Also, there have been
5 donor cofinancing grants from Japan’s Fund for Poverty Reduction, Kuwait Fund, CIDA
(2) and DFID amounting to US$106.45 million. ADB's private sector operations in
Afghanistan began in 2004. As of end June 2010, cumulative approvals for seven private
sector projects have amounted to US$208.1 million, including support for Afghanistan
International Bank, Roshan Telecommunications, and the Afghanistan Investment Guarantee
Facility.
5.
The Asian Development Bank has been actively engaged in providing analytical and
advisory technical assistance (TA) services to the Government, with total TA amounting to

13
some US$64.6 million as of 25 September 2011 (including US$8.2 million in donor
cofinancing). Increasingly, TA is included as integral parts of ADB's grant-based investment
projects, with focus on public financial management, procurement, and anti-corruption as
well as institutional and human capacity development. ADB has also been providing ongoing
TA support to the Ministry of Finance.
6.
ADB is a member of the Afghanistan Compact/ANDS Joint Coordination
Management Board (JCMB) and also is a member of the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund Management Committee. ADB plays an active part in other donor coordination
activities, including the JCMB Social and Economic Development Standing Committee, the
Ministry of Finance's High Level Committee on Aid Effectiveness, and the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Energy.

14
ANNEX V. ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN––STATISTICAL ISSUES
(As of September 21, 2011)
I. Assessment of Data Adequacy for Surveillance
General. Data provision has some shortcomings, but is broadly adequate for surveillance and
program monitoring. The statistical system has improved significantly since 2002. Nonetheless,
organizational weaknesses, poor staffing, and lack of equipment––in addition to difficult security
situation––continue to hamper the compilation and dissemination processes. The IMF continues to
provide technical assistance through peripatetic statistical advisors, as well as short-term topical
missions.
National Accounts and Prices. Although the Central Statistics Organization (CSO) has been

improving national accounts statistics––with technical assistance from the IMF and other
providers––the national accounts compilation process is hampered by the general lack of
source data and limited resources and capacity. The compilation broadly follows the System
of National Accounts 1993 (1993 SNA) and is rather basic. Estimates of value added are
prepared by industrial sectors. Private consumption expenditure is derived as a residual and
includes changes in inventories and all discrepancies. Validation of GDP calculations is
needed using independent estimates of private consumption and income from abroad, as well
as improvement in price, industrial classifications, surveys and sources––ultimately followed
by a revision of official time series. National account aggregates monitored by the IMF
exclude the narcotics sector, which constitutes about 20 percent of the economy.
The CSO compiles and publishes monthly consumer price indices for the capital city, Kabul,
and five other major cities. Although in some cases the procedures may not necessarily
follow best practices, in general, the current CPI compilation methods adhere to
internationally accepted standards. This is a remarkable achievement given insecurity and the
scarce resources devoted to the CPI unit: 17 staff nationwide including price collectors, four
computers, a few bicycles for transportation, and Afghan post for data transmission. The
CSO is undertaking a major overhaul of the CPI, namely (i) implementation of full, five-digit
Classification of Individual Consumption by Purpose (COICOP); (ii) update of consumer
basket weights using data from a recent household survey (current weights date back to
1987); and (iii) expansion of coverage from six to ten cities/provinces (out of 34).
Concordance matrices between the old classification, the COICOP, and the survey are ready,
weights have been estimated, and price collection has been going on in new provinces for
some time. The IMF currently monitors Kabul CPI only, because of its timeliness and
reliability, but intends to switch to a new, nationwide CPI as soon as it is rolled out in 2012.
Government finance statistics. Fiscal data are compiled on cash basis based on the Government

Finance Statistics Manual 2001 (GFSM 2001). The timeliness and quality of the central
government budget data (“core budget”) have been improving, particularly after completion
of the roll out and connectivity of the Afghanistan Financial Management Information

15
System (AFMIS) to all central government line ministries and agencies in Kabul and all
provincial offices. With IMF support, the Ministry of Finance is gradually implementing
GFSM 2001. A workshop on Government Finance Statistics for the Ministry of Finance and
the Central Statistics Office officials was held in late 2009. Following that workshop, the
authorities started to report monthly GFS data to the IMF for the central government budget.
The ministry is also working on expanding the coverage of monthly and quarterly GFS data
to general government. Nevertheless, progress has been mixed, hindered by other priorities
and limited technical capacity.
Monetary and Financial Statistics. The scope and quality of data reporting by the central bank

have improved. Da Afghanistan Bank (DAB) now produces its balance sheet on a monthly
basis. Since 2007, commercial banks have been reporting data to DAB regularly using
templates developed for the purpose of supervision and monetary statistics compilation. The
IMF is assisting DAB in bringing the reporting in compliance with the IMF’s Monetary and
Financial Statistics Manual. DAB is reporting the Standardized Report Forms for Monetary
and Financial Statistics to the IMF for publication in the International Financial Statistics
(IFS) database on a monthly basis. A country page for Afghanistan was reintroduced in IFS
in March 2008.
Balance of payments. Balance of payments statistics are compiled according to the fifth

edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. Although improving, the compilation process
suffers from a paucity of source data, low organizational capacity, and limited resources.
Customs coverage of overland foreign trade is weak and there are no reliable estimates of
unrecorded border trade, which constitutes a significant proportion of international trade.
Source data to estimate services, income, transfers, foreign direct investment, and other
statistics are weak. Surveys of enterprises suffer from poor response, sampling problems, and
lack of human, financial, and technological resources. Further, lack of an adequate legal
framework hinders the ability of DAB to collect information from enterprises in the
nonfinancial sector. DAB compiles rudimentary quarterly balance of payments statistics;
however, additional work is required to improve the coverage and accuracy of the estimates
to levels that would make the data acceptable for broader dissemination. Regarding external
debt, the reconciliation of record has been completed in the context of Paris Club
rescheduling, the completion of the HIPC initiative in 2010, and subsequent debt relief. Debt
management and reporting systems are in place and functional at the Ministry of Finance. No
International Investment Position statistics are produced due to lack of capacity.
II. Data Standards and Quality
Afghanistan has been a GDDS participant since June 2006.

No data ROSC has been published

III. Reporting to STA
The authorities are reporting data for the Fund’s International Financial Statistics, Government
Finance Statistics Yearbook, and the Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook.

16
Afghanistan: Table of Common Indicators Required for Surveillance
(As of September 21, 2011)

Exchange Rates
International Reserve Assets and
Reserve Liabilities of the
Monetary Authorities1
Reserve/Base Money
Broad Money
Central Bank Balance Sheet
Consolidated Balance Sheet of
the Banking System
Interest Rates2
Consumer Price Index
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
and Composition of Financing3 –
General Government4
Revenue, Expenditure, Balance
and Composition of Financing3–
Central Government
Stocks of Central Government
and Central GovernmentGuaranteed Debt5
External Current Account Balance
Exports and Imports of Goods
and Services
GDP/GNP
Gross External Debt
International Investment Position6

Date of latest
observation
09/21/11

Date
Frequency of Frequency of Frequency of
received
Data7
Reporting7 publication7
09/21/11
D
D
D

August 2011

09/03/11

M

M

M

August 2011
June 2011
August 2011

09/03/11
09/07/11
09/03/11

M
M
M

M
M
M

M
M
M

June 2011

09/07/11

M

M

M

09/21/11
August 2011

09/21/11
09/05/11

D
M

M
M

M
M

--

--

--

--

--

May 2011

09/10/11

M

M

M

20011/12 Q1

07/13/11

Q

Q

Q

2010/11 Q3

02/14/11

Q

Q

Q

2010/11 Q3

02/14/11

Q

Q

Q

2009/10
20011/12 Q1
--

12/15/10
07/13/11
--

A
Q
--

A
Q
--

A
Q
--

1

Any reserve assets that are pledged of otherwise encumbered should be specified separately. Also,
data should comprise short-term liabilities linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means as
well as the notional values of financial derivatives to pay and to receive foreign currency, including
those linked to a foreign currency but settled by other means

2

Both market-based and officially-determined, including discount rates, money market rates, rates on
treasury bills, notes and bonds.

3

Foreign, domestic bank, and domestic nonbank financing.

4

The general government consists of the central government (budgetary funds, extra budgetary
funds, and social security funds) and state and local governments.

5

Including currency and maturity composition.

6

Includes external gross financial asset and liability position vis-à-vis nonresidents.

7

Daily (D), Weekly (W), Monthly (M), Quarterly (Q), Annually (A); Not Available (--).

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN
Joint World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis
Prepared by the Staffs of the International Monetary Fund and the
International Development Association
November 2, 2011
Approved by Adnan Mazarei and Dhaneshwar Ghura (IMF)
and Jeffrey D. Lewis and Ernesto May (World Bank)
Afghanistan continues to be at a high risk of debt distress.1, 2 Following debt relief under the
enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative and Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative (MDRI), Afghanistan’s external and public debt burden indicators improve in the
near term. However, and as noted in the HIPC Initiative Paper prepared in early 2010, debt
burden indicators could deteriorate rapidly if the country’s substantial financing needs were
met with new loans, even concessional ones, instead of the current grant financing.3 In a
nutshell, Afghanistan should restrict any borrowing to highly concessional financing for
specific projects with a clearly identified economic return. The baseline scenario is
optimistic, not least in terms of the assumption on security, and the probability of the
alternative scenarios (or stress tests) is high; in many ways, the outlook could be
characterized as bi-modal. The alternative scenarios, therefore, do not only illustrate
Afghanistan’s vulnerability, but depict possible outcomes that reflect the challenges of
envisaged transition and transformation in the wake of the withdrawal of large-scale foreign
presence.
1

The results presented here are based on an update of the debt sustainability analysis (DSA) based on the joint
IMF/World Bank debt sustainability framework for low-income countries (LICs) (see
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/lic.htm and http://www.imf.org/External/np/pp/eng/2005/032805.htm)

2

The LIC DSA compares the evolution over the projection period of debt-burden indicators against policydependent indicative thresholds, using the three-year average of the World Bank’s Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment (CPIA). With an average 2010 CPIA of 2.6, Afghanistan is classified as a “weak
performer” according to the Debt Sustainability Framework (DSF).

3

Afghanistan: HIPC Initiative Paper, IMF Country Report No. 10/40
(http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2010/cr1040.pdf); and Memorandum and Recommendation of the
President of the International Development Association to the Executive Directors on Assistance to the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and the Multilateral
Debt Relief Initiative Report No.51184-AF.

2

A. Baseline Scenario
1.
The baseline macroeconomic scenario depicts an optimistic outlook predicated
on a stable security situation. The political and economic backdrop in Afghanistan has
altered since January 2010. The financial sector crisis and periods of foreign military
withdrawal (transition) and gradual donor disengagement (transformation) are important
developments that have entered the projections. Accordingly, the baseline has been revised
in light of these recent changes. It also assumes that security will remain stable during the
transition phase and that civilian foreign assistance will be reduced only gradually over the
longer-term transformation. While this is clearly a desired outcome, it is by no means
guaranteed. In comparison to the previous debt sustainability analysis (DSA),4 external and
fiscal sustainability remains vulnerable to external shocks (Tables 1–6), and Afghanistan
remains at risk of high debt distress.
Box 1. Macroeconomic Assumptions Comparison Table
Previous DSA

Differences
(current vs. previous)

Current DSA

MT

LT

2011

MT

LT

MT

LT

6.9
4.0
949

5.7
3.5
2662

5.7
11.7
862

6.1
6.2
1082

4.6
4.3
2947

-0.9
2.2
133

-1.1
0.8
284

Revenue and grants (% GDP)
Grants (% GDP)
Primary expenditure (% GDP)
Primary deficit (% GDP)

19.8
10.1
22.0
-2.1

18.2
5.5
20.6
-2.0

23.7
12.2
23.8
-0.1

24.0
11.4
25.3
-1.2

23.0
5.5
25.4
-2.0

4.2
1.3
3.3
0.9

4.7
0.0
4.9
0.0

Exports of G&S (% GDP)
Imports of G&S (% GDP)
Noninterest current account deficit (% GDP)

7.0
59.2
-3.4

8.0
36.7
-4.7

5.8
54.6
0.1

6.3
48.4
-2.5

9.1
32.4
-1.5

-0.7
-10.8
0.9

1.1
-4.3
3.2

Real growth (%)
Inflation (GDP deflator, %)
Nominal GDP (Bil. Afghani)

Note: For current DSA, MT stands for medium term and reflects average over 2011-2015, and LT refers to long term reflecting average over 20162030. For previous DSA (January 2010), MT and LT correspond to the periods 2010-2014 and 2015-2029 respectively.

2.
Projections are based on the progress made in 2010/11, marked by successful
disinflation and economic growth. Under the baseline scenario, continued economic
reforms, including improvements in governance and the business environment, will allow for
major investment in the mining sector, agriculture, transport, and reconstruction.
Accordingly, the nonagricultural sector is expected to outperform agriculture. In particular,
Afghanistan has considerable potential in the mining industry, with exploitation of mineral

4

Afghanistan: HIPC Initiative Paper, IMF Country Report No. 10/40, February 2010.

3
wealth expected to begin in 2014/15.5 Over the medium term (2011/12–2015/16), real GDP
growth is expected to average 6 percent, compared with 10 percent in the recent decade.
Over the longer term (2025/26–2030/31), growth is projected to converge to 4 percent.6
Table 1. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Medium and Long-Term Macroeconomic Framework, 2010/11–2029/30
Projection
2010/11
Prel.

Medium Term
2011/12 2012/13 2013/14

Long Term
2017/18 2019/20 2021/22 2024/25 2026/27 2029/30

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
Output and prices 1/
Real GDP
GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars)
Consumer prices (period average)

8.4
528
7.7

5.7
591
10.5

Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment
Of which: Private
Gross domestic savings
Of which: Private

26.3
8.5
27.9
9.2

22.6
8.6
22.6
8.6

21.9
8.9
20.9
9.3

21.6
9.5
19.0
8.5

23.6
13.7
19.0
10.7

25.6
16.2
21.8
14.7

22.0
11.0
11.0
21.1
15.1
5.9
0.9

23.7
11.5
12.2
23.8
17.6
6.2
0.0

23.7
11.3
12.4
25.3
18.6
6.6
-1.6

24.0
11.6
12.4
25.7
18.7
7.0
-1.7

23.4
15.6
7.7
25.1
17.4
7.7
-1.7

3.3
-4.1

1.6
-6.1

0.4
-7.4

0.2
-7.1

17.8
57.4
-39.6

15.8
50.0
-34.1

13.5
46.8
-33.3

-39.8
1.7
5,321

-34.3
0.1
6,121

30.5
8.0
8.0

22.1
7.9
12.1

Public finances
Domestic revenues and grants
Domestic revenues
Grants
Expenditures
Operating 2/
Development
Overall balance (including grants)
Operating balance
Including grants 3/
Excluding grants 4/
External sector 1/
Exports of goods 5/
Imports of goods
Merchandise trade balance
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Gross reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
Memorandum items:
External budget grants 6/
Total external debt 7/
Public sector debt

7.1
612
4.6

5.8
637
5.0

6.6
758
5.0

5.6
802
4.8

5.4
860
4.5

3.9
918
4.1

4.0
969
4.0

4.0
1,062
4.0

25.1
16.1
22.4
15.7

23.2
15.0
21.8
15.9

22.3
14.6
21.5
16.0

21.0
13.8
21.1
16.0

22.1
15.5
6.6
24.6
16.5
8.1
-2.5

22.5
16.4
6.1
25.1
16.7
8.4
-2.6

22.8
17.4
5.4
25.3
17.4
8.0
-2.6

22.8
17.9
4.9
25.4
17.7
7.7
-2.6

23.0
18.5
4.5
25.5
18.2
7.3
-2.5

0.9
-1.7

-0.9
-1.0

-0.3
-0.3

0.0
0.0

0.2
0.2

0.3
0.3

12.2
43.9
-31.7

17.3
36.2
-18.9

17.5
32.5
-15.0

20.1
31.2
-11.1

20.3
27.8
-7.6

20.2
26.3
-6.0

20.1
24.3
-4.2

-33.2
-1.1
6,627

-31.5
-2.6
7,178

-21.3
-4.6
6,877

-17.3
-3.7
6,732

-14.1
-2.8
6,410

-10.4
-1.4
5,928

-8.5
-0.8
5,830

-6.3
0.1
5,691

19.7
8.6
13.7

16.5
9.1
15.2

9.0
10.6
13.4

6.9
11.6
14.7

5.2
12.6
17.3

3.6
14.9
21.0

2.8
16.3
23.3

2.0
17.8
26.1

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)

Source: Afghan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Excluding the narcotics economy.
2/ Comprising mainly current spending.
3/ Defined as domestic revenues plus operating grants minus operating expenditures.
4/ Defined as domestic revenues minus operating expenditures.
5/ Includes official recorded exports, estimates of smuggling, reexports and sales to nonresidents.
6/ Estimated direct expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the government budget.
7/ After HIPC and MDRI debt relief, as well as debt relief beyond HIPC relief from Paris Club creditors. Debt includes obligations to the IMF.

5

Under the baseline scenario, the production of copper from the Aynak mine is assumed to start in 2014/15 at
20,000 tons and to increase to 200,000 tons by 2016/17. Based on copper price projections from the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook Database, the value of copper production (assumed to equal the value of exports) is
expected to reach US$2 billion in the outer years of the projection period. Iron exports from Hajigak and other
mining projects are estimated to begin in 2019/20 at about US$200 million and increase thereafter to around
US$1.4 billion in 2030/31.

6

Private investment as a share of GDP is projected to increase from about 9 percent at present to about
16 percent by the end of this decade.

4
3.
While the overall macroeconomic situation is expected to improve, Afghanistan
will likely remain dependent on donor support in the foreseeable future. Large financing
gaps are projected for the remainder of this decade, and total donor support to finance both
operating and development expenditures (on- and off-budget) is expected to remain
substantial, at about US$3–4 billion per year by 2030/31. However, as the economy becomes
increasingly self-sustained over time through economic growth, higher exports, and higher
foreign investment, the share of total external support (the sum of grants and loans) to GDP
is projected to decline from 35 percent in 2011/12 to 9 percent by the end of the 20-year
projection period. While revenues are projected to increase to just under 19 percent of GDP
by 2030/31, the share of grants in total external support is expected to decline gradually from
97 percent in 2011/12 to 76 percent at the end of projection period (equal to 6 percent of
GDP). Such an increase in revenues over the long term will only be possible if the security
situation is stable and the authorities implement key reforms in a timely manner.
Figure 1. Afghanistan: Current Account Balance Excluding Grants
(In percent of GDP)
CA balance excl. grants

External budget grants

Total grants

Total grants and external loans

80

60

40

20

0
2008/2009

2011/12

2014/15

2017/18

2020/21

2023/24

2026/27

2029/30

-20

-40

-60

-80

4.
Over the projection period, exports are expected to increase significantly, while
somewhat lower growth in imports is associated with a decline of government-related
imports, resulting from lower donor expenditure. Projections are based on the assumption
that improvements in security, regional stability and economic reforms in combination with
an enhanced investment climate, including in the mining sector, will contribute to higher

5
total factor productivity. Basic infrastructure is expected to improve, allowing for some
import substitution in light industries. In view of its unique geographical position,
Afghanistan could develop into a regional hub in transit trade, with significant potential for
exports of transportation services associated with trade between the Middle East and Central
Asia. These are clearly very tenuous assumptions.
5.
The current account deficit is projected to decline over the projection period. In
2010/11, officially recorded exports accounted for only 3 percent of GDP, while officially
recorded imports reached 46 percent of GDP (of which donor-related imports amounted to
25 percent of GDP). Accordingly, the current account deficit (excluding official transfers)––
which was high at 40 percent of GDP––is projected to decline to 26 percent by 2015/16 and
further to about 6 percent at the end of the projection period, mirroring the projected decline
in grants, in particular external budget grants (Figure 1). The improvement in the current
account will be supported by a continuous increase in exports and some import substitution.
Under a more favorable scenario, if Afghanistan’s potential in the mining industry and in
transit trade should be greater than assumed in the baseline, the current account deficit could
decline faster in the outer years.
Figure 2. Afghanistan: Current Account Balance Including Grants
(In percent of GDP)
CA balance incl. grants

Private investment

Private savings

20

15

10

5

0
2008/2009

-5

-10

2011/12

2014/15

2017/18

2020/21

2023/24

2026/27

2029/30

6
B. External Debt Sustainability Analysis
6.
Following debt relief under the enhanced HIPC initiative and MDRI,
Afghanistan’s external and public debt burden indicators have improved significantly.
Afghanistan’s external public and publicly guaranteed debt amounted to US$1.3 billion, or
8 percent of GDP, in 2010/11. The bulk of this debt was owed to Paris Club and multilateral
creditors. In present value terms, it reached about 4 percent of GDP at end-2010/11, or
72 percent of exports. Public external debt service was equivalent to 0.8 percent of exports of
goods and services.
7.
The present value of public external debt would gradually increase to about
12 percent of GDP by the end of the projection period under the baseline scenario.
However, the present value of the debt-to-exports ratio is expected to breach the 100 percent
threshold in the outer years of the projection period (Figure 3), implying the potential for
debt distress. The indicative thresholds for the low-income country (LIC) DSA could be
breached toward the end of the projection period.
Table 2. Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Public and Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt, 2009/10–2015/16
2009/10
Act.

2010/11
Est.

2011/12
Proj.

2012/13
Proj.

2013/14
Proj.

2014/15
Proj.

2015/16
Proj.

(In millions of U.S. dollars)
Total government external debt 1/
Bilateral creditors
Of which: Paris Club creditors 2/
Multilateral creditors
Of which: use of Fund resources
Service on government external debt
Of which: to the Fund
Amortization paid
Of which: to the Fund
Interest paid
Of which: to the Fund

1,146.9
13.6
0.0
1,133.3
92.4

1,279.6
13.6
0.0
1,263.3
89.7

1,454.1
13.2
0.0
1,441.7
111.4

1,678.7
12.7
0.0
1,692.2
173.3

1,908.9
12.2
0.0
1,911.1
197.8

2,147.1
11.6
0.0
2,129.2
216.8

2,390.0
11.0
0.0
2,349.6
193.8

19.8
1.7
1.1
0.0
18.7
1.7

12.5
0.1
1.3
0.0
11.2
0.1

14.4
1.1
2.6
0.9
11.8
0.1

22.2
6.5
7.9
5.9
14.4
0.5

43.6
14.9
26.9
14.3
16.8
0.6

66.4
21.6
47.2
21.0
19.2
0.6

56.2
23.9
32.0
23.2
24.2
0.6

8.7
0.1
0.0
8.8
0.9
0.1
0.0
0.0

9.2
0.1
0.0
9.2
1.0
0.2
0.1
0.0

9.7
0.1
0.0
9.6
1.0
0.3
0.2
0.0

10.0
0.0
0.0
9.8
0.8
0.2
0.1
0.0

(In percent of GDP)
Total government external debt
Bilateral creditors
Of which: Paris Club creditors 2/
Multilateral creditors
Of which: use of Fund resources
Service on government debt
Amortization
Interest

9.0
0.1
0.0
8.9
0.7
0.2
0.0
0.0

8.0
0.1
0.0
7.9
0.6
0.1
0.0
0.0

8.2
0.1
0.0
8.1
0.6
0.1
0.0
0.0

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ According to the BOP Manual, a debt reorganization operation is considered to be completed and can be fully reflected in
the balance of payments only if all preconditions mentioned in agreements are fulfilled. For agreements with the Paris Club,
this provision is interpreted flexibly by regarding the signature of the Agreed Minute with the Paris Club as sufficient to treat
such an agreement as completed in the BOP. The latter treatment has been followed by the staffs in preparing this Debt
Sustainability Analysis.
2/ Excludes Russian claims prior to their regularization via a Paris Club rescheduling.

7
Alternative Scenarios
8.
Risks to the outlook are heavily on the downside, linked to security prospects,
the strength of future reforms, and a deteriorating fiscal outlook.7 Should security remain
fragile or worsen, economic growth would consequently suffer. Figure 3 presents the results
of a customized alternative “lower-growth” scenario, in line with the scenario depicted in,
Appendix II of the staff report. The “lower-growth” scenario (A1) depicts the absence of
gains in security, governance, and public sector reforms, as well as a slower reform path with
respect to financial sector reform and the business environment. A fragile security situation,
in combination with delays in key reforms, would potentially discourage investment and
external support, and result in lower exports, as well as a slowdown in revenue effort. With
the possibility of delays of mining production, revenues from this sector would also suffer.
Under this scenario, real GDP growth falls from 2 percent on average (instead of 6 percent in
the baseline) in the medium term (2011/12–2015/16) to 1½ percent (instead of 4 percent in
the baseline) in the long term (2025/26–2030/31). The present value (PV) of the debt-to-GDP
ratio would reach 138 percent by the end of projection period, while the PV of the debt-toexports ratio would reach 1,239 percent. Under this scenario, the remaining thresholds would
also be breached with a significant margin. The second alternative scenario (A2) implies a
deterioration of the fiscal outlook with lower resources and use of funds. Under this scenario,
Afghanistan would face a rapid deterioration of debt- burden indicators, with the PV of the
debt-to-GDP ratio reaching 118 percent and the PV of the debt-to-exports ratio projected at
1,068 percent by the end of the projection period.
9.
Afghanistan remains at high risk of external debt distress.8 Given the sustained
and large breaches of the thresholds under the alternative scenarios, the staffs of the IMF and
World Bank continue to classify Afghanistan as “high risk”, based on guidance for debt
distress assessments. A mild deterioration in the profile of donor grants even in the baseline
could increase the risk of debt distress, further strengthening the rationale for the
classification.
C. Fiscal Debt Sustainability
10.
Public debt indicators grow markedly under the baseline (Table 5 and Figure 4).
To enhance the monitoring of the domestic debt burden in the long run, the LIC DSA
explicitly includes net domestic financing (NDF) and service obligations on this debt.9
7

This DSA does not include standard stress tests, as these would not be characterized by additional
vulnerabilities.

8

Afghanistan is classified as a “weak performer” and its thresholds therefore: 30 percent of net present value
for the debt-to-GDP ratio; 100 percent of NPV for the debt-to-exports ratio; 200 percent for the debt-to-revenue
ratio; 15 percent for the debt service-to-exports ratio; and 25 percent for the debt service-to-revenue ratio.

9

An interest rate of 5 percent is assumed on NDF.

8
Security-related expenditure will continue to account for a large share of operating
expenditures. The baseline scenario assumes that (i) a value-added tax (VAT) will be
introduced in 2014/15; (ii) a national tax and customs administration will be established in
order to minimize political interference; (iii) the taxpayers segmentation approach will be
strengthened further by enhancing the small, medium and large taxpayers offices;
(iv) corruption will be combated by adopting modern business models and IT systems;
(v) management will be strengthened to ensure that the reform momentum is maintained and
more weight given to strategic planning of tax and customs operations; and (vi) minimal
operations and maintenance expenditure (O&M) beyond those already included by the
government in the operating budget. While development spending is expected to increase
and raise potential GDP, investment will depend on the strength of reforms and a stable
environment. In view of strong expenditure pressures expected on the budget, debt service of
6 percent of fiscal revenues by the end of the forecast period (over 2 percent of which is for
servicing domestic debt) is of concern. The expansion of domestic debt reinforces the risk of
a high debt distress rating.
11.
The alternative scenarios and stress tests demonstrate the fragility of
Afghanistan’s economy. Under the scenario with permanently lower GDP growth (A1),
debt service reaches about 34 percent of revenues by the end of the forecast period, leaving
very limited fiscal space for investments or social expenditure. Risks to the outlook are also
linked to revenue potential and grant financing. Figure 4 also presents the results of a
customized alternative “lower sources and higher uses” scenario (A2).
12.
The alternative scenarios look at risks to revenue targets and expenditure
control. The “lower sources and higher uses” scenario assumes a reduction in revenues and
grants while spending pressures increase. Specifically, the scenario incorporates a one-year
delay in the implementation of the VAT as well as a reduction in revenue efficiency due to
lagging reforms. This translates into an erosion in total revenue effort of approximately
1 percent of GDP on average over the horizon. At the same time, donors are assumed to
disengage at a faster rate, through both on-budget and off-budget grants, with grants leveling
off at the same proportion of GDP by 2030/31. To this we add increased operating
expenditures from nonsecurity operations and maintenance (O&M) costs due to the takeover
of projects and existing capital stocks from donors.10 Current estimates put these costs in the
order of US$900 million in 2011.11 The customized scenarios highlight the importance of a
stable revenue outlook and a level of grants and concessional borrowing in line with baseline
projections. The explosive trajectory for expenditures due to O&M costs highlights the need

10

The O&M costs excluding those that arise from the security sector are also likely to be substantial and are
much harder to quantify. See Appendix III: “Fiscal Survival and Fiscal Sustainability” of the staff report.
11

World Bank, forthcoming, “Transition in Afghanistan Looking Beyond 2014,” Washington, D.C.

9
for continued donor involvement, without which the primary balance moves into excessive
deficit, triggering significant debt distress.
D. Conclusions
13.
Afghanistan remains at high risk of debt distress after the HIPC completion
point and the delivery of debt relief under the MDRI. Despite the substantial amount of
debt forgiven under the HIPC and MDRI,12 continuing risks to the macroeconomic outlook
and large financing needs underscore the importance of substantial and long-term grant
financing, in combination with a strong reform agenda and progress in security and
governance. Should donors decide to reduce aid rapidly and security fail to stabilize, or
structural reforms and governance improvements lag, Afghanistan’s debt burden would
quickly become unsustainable.
14.
The authorities recognize the risks and are committed to ensuring debt
sustainability. The government is cognizant of its responsibilities, but remains very
concerned about the speed of donor withdrawal. Rapid exit by the international community
could jeopardize the long-term reform process, which is critical to ensuring a favorable
business and investment environment, and would place significant additional pressure on an
already constrained pool of resources.

12

A 100 percent debt forgiveness agreement with the United States in the amount of US$109 million came into
effect in September 2010, and the authorities signed a final debt forgiveness agreement with Germany in the
amount of US$17 million in January 2011. Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Croatia also provided 100 percent debt
relief. The authorities are still discussing debt restructuring and relief with non-Paris Club creditors, namely
Bulgaria, Iran, Kuwait and OPEC.

Table 3.: External Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2008-30 1/
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Historical 0 Standard
Average 0 Deviation

Actual

External debt (nominal) 1/
o/w public and publicly guaranteed (PPG)
Change in external debt
Identified net debt-creating flows
Non-interest current account deficit
Deficit in balance of goods and services
Exports
Imports
Net current transfers (negative = inflow)
o/w official
Other current account flows (negative = net inflow)
Net FDI (negative = inflow)
Endogenous debt dynamics 2/
Contribution from nominal interest rate
Contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from price and exchange rate changes
Residual (3-4) 3/
o/w exceptional financing

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

19.8
19.8
-3.1
-7.5
-1.0
83.1
8.4
91.5
-65.1
-60.5
-19.0
-2.9
-3.7
0.1
-0.7
-3.1
4.4
0.0

9.0
9.0
-10.7
-2.8
2.7
70.4
6.5
76.9
-51.1
-48.5
-16.6
-2.4
-3.1
0.1
-3.5
0.3
-7.9
-8.5

8.0
8.0
-1.1
-4.3
-1.7
56.4
6.0
62.4
-43.8
-41.5
-14.3
-2.1
-0.6
0.0
-0.6
…
3.2
0.0

8.2
8.2
0.2
-2.6
-0.1
48.8
5.8
54.6
-36.5
-34.4
-12.4
-2.1
-0.4
0.0
-0.4
…
2.8
0.0

8.7
8.7
0.5
-1.8
1.0
45.1
6.2
51.2
-34.2
-32.2
-9.9
-2.3
-0.5
0.1
-0.5
…
2.3
0.0

9.2
9.2
0.5
-0.8
2.5
41.9
6.3
48.2
-31.0
-29.0
-8.4
-2.9
-0.4
0.1
-0.5
…
1.3
0.0

9.7
9.7
0.5
0.3
4.2
39.7
6.5
46.1
-27.2
-25.3
-8.2
-3.6
-0.3
0.1
-0.5
…
0.2
-0.1

10.0
10.0
0.3
0.1
4.4
37.0
6.5
43.5
-23.6
-21.8
-9.0
-3.8
-0.4
0.1
-0.6
…
0.2
-0.1

...
...
...
...
...
1.2
1.2
1.2
-391.3
2.1

4.7
71.4
4.7
71.4
45.0
1.9
1.9
1.2
45.4
13.4

4.3
71.7
4.3
71.7
39.0
0.8
0.8
0.4
-592.8
-0.6

4.6
78.9
4.6
78.9
40.2
0.8
0.8
0.4
-400.6
-0.4

5.1
82.8
5.1
82.8
45.3
1.2
1.2
0.6
-237.2
0.5

5.5
87.3
5.5
87.3
47.8
2.5
2.5
1.4
-53.4
1.9

5.9
91.0
5.9
91.0
43.9
3.7
3.6
1.8
195.6
3.8

6.1
93.9
6.1
93.9
42.4
2.7
2.7
1.2
169.0
4.1

3.6
15.6
0.5
38.1
14.1
...
7.8
1,025
1,025
0.2
...
...

21.0
-1.5
0.7
-7.1
0.2
...
10.3
1,276
1,276
0.2
...
...

8.4
17.7
0.5
17.1
3.6
38.6
11.0
1,782
1,746
36.0
11.3
95.6

5.7
9.0
0.5
12.8
0.9
37.3
11.5
2,294
2,249
45.0
12.6
95.4

7.1
-0.4
0.9
12.4
0.1
36.4
11.3
2,493
2,439
54.1
12.9
94.6

5.8
1.3
1.2
10.2
0.8
36.7
11.6
2,670
2,610
60.5
12.8
94.6

5.4
1.4
1.4
9.3
2.3
36.8
13.4
2,541
2,473
67.9
11.4
93.9

6.3
1.6
1.6
9.0
2.0
39.2
14.4
2,395
2,319
76.0
10.0
94.0

10,471 12,481
19.7
19.2
590

15,928
27.6
690
0.8
…
4.3
71.7
0.8

18,364
15.3
819
0.8
…
4.6
78.9
0.8

19,603
6.7
982
0.9
…
5.1
82.8
1.2

21,015
7.2
1,142
0.8
…
5.5
87.3
2.5

22,477
7.0
1,302
0.8
…
5.9
91.0
3.6

24,273
8.0
1,465
0.7
…
6.1
93.9
2.7

3.4

5.6

-58.5

15.9

-2.6

1.0

2011-2015
Average

2.4

-30.5

-2.9

2020

2030

12.3
12.3
0.5
-0.9
3.4
28.4
7.8
36.2
-14.2
-12.6
-10.8
-3.8
-0.4
0.2
-0.6
…
1.4
0.0

18.5
18.5
0.4
-3.4
-0.7
16.2
11.1
27.3
-7.4
-6.2
-9.5
-2.3
-0.5
0.2
-0.7
…
3.8
0.0

2016-2030
Average

1.9

-12.2

-3.0

7.8
12.5
99.8
112.6
7.8
12.5
99.8 112.6
49.3
66.3
3.8
4.6
3.8
4.6
1.9
2.7
-50.9 -1,358.7
2.9
-1.1

10

PV of external debt 4/
In percent of exports
PV of PPG external debt
In percent of exports
In percent of government revenues
Debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-exports ratio (in percent)
PPG debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent)
Total gross financing need (millions of U.S. dollars)
Non-interest current account deficit that stabilizes debt ratio

Projections

2008

Key macroeconomic assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
GDP deflator in US dollar terms (change in percent)
Effective interest rate (percent) 5/
Growth of exports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Growth of imports of G&S (US dollar terms, in percent)
Grant element of new public sector borrowing (in percent)
Government revenues (excluding grants, in percent of GDP)
Aid flows (in millions of US dollars) 7/
o/w Grants
o/w Concessional loans
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of GDP) 8/
Grant-equivalent financing (in percent of external financing) 8/
Memorandum items:
Nominal GDP (millions of US dollars)
Nominal dollar GDP growth
PV of PPG external debt (in millions of US dollars)
(PVt-PVt-1)/GDPt-1 (in percent)
Gross remittances (millions of US dollars)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of GDP + remittances)
PV of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Debt service of PPG external debt (in percent of exports + remittances)
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.

…
...
...
...

…
4.7
71.4
1.9

9.1
8.8
0.5
30.1
19.7
…

6.3
6.7
0.2
39.0
26.1
...

6.1
2.6
1.1
10.7
1.2
37.3

8.8
0.8

5.4
0.9
1.5
9.8
5.9
39.2
15.8
2,354
2,220
134.1
7.1
89.9

4.0
1.2
1.2
8.8
2.9
39.2
18.8
2,737
2,466
270.9
5.0
83.8

33,576
6.4
2,578
0.8
…
7.8
99.8
3.8

55,817
5.3
6,865
1.0
…
12.5
112.6
4.6

4.6
1.1
1.3
9.5
2.5
39.2
17.0

6.5
87.6

5.7
0.9

0
1/ Includes both public and private sector external debt.
2/ Derived as [r - g - ρ(1+g)]/(1+g+ρ+gρ) times previous period debt ratio, with r = nominal interest rate; g = real GDP growth rate, and ρ = growth rate of GDP deflator in U.S. dollar terms.
3/ Includes exceptional financing (i.e., changes in arrears and debt relief); changes in gross foreign assets; and valuation adjustments. For projections also includes contribution from price and exchange rate changes.
4/ Assumes that PV of private sector debt is equivalent to its face value.
5/ Current-year interest payments divided by previous period debt stock.
6/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.
7/ Defined as grants, concessional loans, and debt relief.
8/ Grant-equivalent financing includes grants provided directly to the government and through new borrowing (difference between the face value and the PV of new debt).

11
Table 4a.Afghanistan: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2011-2030
(In percent)
Projections
2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2020

2030

5

5

6

6

6

8

12

4
4

5
4

5
5

6
7

7
12

29
56

138
118

5
5
5
5
5
6

5
5
5
4
6
7

6
5
6
1
4
7

6
6
6
2
4
8

6
6
6
2
5
8

8
8
8
4
6
11

13
12
13
11
11
17

79

83

87

91

94

100

113

62
62

74
69

86
77

96
109

102
179

364
715

1,239
1,068

76
79
76
79
79
76

81
81
81
60
96
81

86
83
86
19
72
86

90
87
90
26
80
90

92
90
92
32
82
92

98
95
98
55
94
98

111
108
111
96
114
111

40

45

48

44

42

49

66

31
31

42
38

52
42

61
60

64
91

243
372

1,133
621

40
40
41
40
40
54

48
44
46
33
50
61

50
47
49
10
36
65

46
43
45
12
33
60

45
42
43
14
33
58

52
48
50
27
40
67

70
65
68
57
58
90

PV of debt-to GDP ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks 5/
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 6/

PV of debt-to-exports ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks 5/
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 6/

PV of debt-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks 5/
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 6/

12
Table 4b.Afghanistan: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2011-2030
(In percent)
Debt service-to-exports ratio
Baseline

1

1

2

4

3

4

5

1
1

1
1

3
3

5
7

4
12

33
67

121
104

1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
3
2

4
4
4
2
3
4

3
3
3
2
3
3

4
4
4
3
4
4

5
4
5
3
4
5

0

1

1

2

1

2

3

0
0

1
1

2
2

3
4

2
6

22
35

111
60

0
0
0
0
0
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
2

2
2
2
1
1
2

1
1
1
1
1
2

2
2
2
2
2
3

3
3
3
2
2
4

37

37

37

37

37

37

37

A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks 5/
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 6/

Debt service-to-revenue ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative Scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound Tests
B1. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B2. Export value growth at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 3/
B3. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013
B4. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one standard deviation in 2012-2013 4/
B5. Combination of B1-B4 using one-half standard deviation shocks 5/
B6. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2012 6/
Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (i.e., financing required above baseline) 6/
Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in U.S. dollar terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
2/ Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the baseline., while grace and maturity periods are the same as in the baseline.
3/ Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline level after the shock (implicitly assuming
an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
4/ Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
5/ Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in dollar/local currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent. Net current transfers modelled as minus 1.5 times standard deviation.
6/ Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

Table 5.Afghanistan: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, Baseline Scenario, 2008-30
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Projections
2008

2009

2010

Average

Standard
Deviation

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2011-15
Average

2020

2030

19.8
19.8

9.0
9.0

8.0
8.0

8.7
8.2

11.2
8.7

13.5
9.2

14.3
9.7

12.1
10.0

16.7
12.3

29.4
18.5

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
of which: grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
Automatic debt dynamics
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
of which: contribution from average real interest rate
of which: contribution from real GDP growth
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation
Other identified debt-creating flows
Privatization receipts (negative)
Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
Debt relief (HIPC and other)
Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

-3.1
-0.1
4.1
17.5
9.8
21.7
-3.5
-1.4
-0.6
-0.8
-2.0
-0.8
-0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
-3.0

-10.7
-2.1
1.6
20.5
10.2
22.1
-3.4
-3.4
0.1
-3.4
-0.1
-0.2
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
-8.7

-1.1
-2.8
-0.9
22.0
11.0
21.1
-1.9
-0.8
-0.1
-0.7
-1.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

0.8
2.8
0.1
23.7
12.2
23.8
-0.7
-0.5
-0.1
-0.4
-0.2
3.4
-0.3
0.0
0.0
3.7
-2.0

2.5
3.6
1.6
23.7
12.4
25.3
-0.6
-0.7
-0.1
-0.6
0.0
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
2.7
-1.1

2.2
2.9
1.6
24.0
12.4
25.6
-0.6
-0.7
-0.1
-0.6
0.0
1.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.9
-0.7

0.8
2.1
1.3
24.4
11.0
25.8
-0.7
-0.7
0.0
-0.7
0.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4
-1.2

-2.2
-0.9
1.2
24.0
9.6
25.2
-0.8
-0.8
0.0
-0.8
0.0
-1.4
-2.3
0.0
0.0
1.0
-1.3

1.4
1.6
2.2
22.5
6.6
24.6
-0.5
-0.7
0.1
-0.8
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.2

0.9
1.0
1.8
23.2
4.4
25.0
-0.8
-0.9
0.2
-1.1
...
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-0.1

0.0
0.0
...
...
4.1
0.0
0.0
…
0.2
0.4
7.2

4.7
4.7
4.7
...
1.6
22.6
45.0
45.0
0.1
0.2
12.3

4.3
4.3
4.3
...
-0.9
19.5
39.0
39.0
0.1
0.2
0.2

5.2
4.6
4.6
...
0.1
21.8
45.0
40.2
-0.1
-0.3
-0.7

7.6
5.1
5.1
...
2.1
32.2
67.8
45.3
0.1
0.2
-1.0

9.8
5.5
5.5
...
4.1
40.7
84.5
47.8
0.7
1.4
-0.6

10.5
5.9
5.9
...
5.5
43.0
78.3
43.9
1.3
2.4
0.5

8.2
6.1
6.1
...
5.7
34.3
57.0
42.4
1.3
2.2
3.4

12.2
7.8
7.8
...
5.8
54.4
77.0
49.3
2.0
2.9
0.8

23.4
12.5
12.5
...
12.5
100.9
124.7
66.3
4.5
5.6
0.9

3.6
0.5
...
-9.5
18.2
0.0
...

21.0
0.7
...
-0.3
-4.7
0.2
...

8.4
0.5
...
-13.1
9.4
0.0
38.6

5.7
0.5
...
...
11.7
0.2
37.3

7.1
0.9
-3.0
...
4.8
0.1
36.4

5.8
1.2
-0.6
...
4.9
0.1
36.7

5.4
1.4
0.5
...
4.8
0.1
36.8

6.3
1.6
1.9
...
4.7
0.0
39.2

5.4
1.5
5.4

4.0
1.2
3.5

1.5

1.8

1.2

1.9

13

Public sector debt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated

2016-30
Average

Other Sustainability Indicators
PV of public sector debt

o/w foreign-currency denominated
o/w external
PV of contingent liabilities (not included in public sector debt)
Gross financing need 2/
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent)
PV of public sector debt-to-revenue ratio (in percent)

o/w external 3/
Debt service-to-revenue and grants ratio (in percent) 4/
Debt service-to-revenue ratio (in percent) 4/
Primary deficit that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio
Key macroeconomic and fiscal assumptions
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on forex debt (in percent)
Average real interest rate on domestic debt (in percent)
Real exchange rate depreciation (in percent, + indicates depreciation)
Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Grant element of new external borrowing (in percent)

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ [Indicate coverage of public sector, e.g., general government or nonfinancial public sector. Also whether net or gross debt is used.]
2/ Gross financing need is defined as the primary deficit plus debt service plus the stock of short-term debt at the end of the last period.
3/ Revenues excluding grants.
4/ Debt service is defined as the sum of interest and amortization of medium and long-term debt.
5/ Historical averages and standard deviations are generally derived over the past 10 years, subject to data availability.

4.6
0.5
...
-7.8
9.1
0.2
…

6.3
0.2
...
4.5
6.5
0.1
…

6.1
1.1
-0.3

4.6
1.3
4.5

...

...

...

...

6.2
0.1
37.3

4.6
0.1
39.2

4.0
0.0
39.2

4.3
0.0
39.2

14
Table 6.Afghanistan: Sensitivity Analysis for Key Indicators of Public Debt 2011-30

2011

2012

Projections
2013 2014 2015

2020

2030

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Baseline

5

8

10

11

8

12

23

4
4

8
11

13
17

18
26

20
31

49
76

158
138

5
8
5
7
15

8
12
8
9
18

10
14
11
11
20

11
15
12
12
21

9
12
10
9
19

14
16
15
13
24

29
28
29
26
37

22

32

41

43

34

54

101

18
18

34
45

53
78

65
116

77
138

211
352

759
551

22
34
22
29
64

33
51
35
39
74

42
59
46
46
83

45
60
49
48
85

37
51
41
39
78

63
72
67
59
108

123
119
126
111
161

0

0

1

1

1

2

5

0
0

0
0

1
1

2
3

2
4

8
13

34
25

0
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
1
3

1
2
1
1
4

2
3
2
2
5

2
3
2
2
5

3
4
3
4
6

7
7
7
8
12

A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012
PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012
Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio
Baseline
A. Alternative scenarios
A1. Lower growth
A2. Lower sources and use of funds
B. Bound tests
B1. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B2. Primary balance is at historical average minus one standard deviations in 2012-2013
B3. Combination of B1-B2 using one half standard deviation shocks
B4. One-time 30 percent real depreciation in 2012
B5. 10 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2012

Sources: Country authorities; and staff estimates and projections.
1/ Assumes that real GDP growth is at baseline minus one standard deviation divided by the square root of the length of the projection period.
2/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

15

Figure 3. Afghanistan: Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External
Debt under Alternative Scenarios, 2011-30
a. Debt Accumulation

14

39.0

12

38.5

140

10

38.0 120

8

37.5 100
37.0
80
36.5
36.0 60

6
4

35.5

2

35.0

0
2011

2016

2021

2026

b.PV of debt-to GDP ratio

39.5 160

34.5
2030

Rate of Debt Accumulation

40
20
0
2011

Grant-equivalent financing (% of GDP)

2016

2021

2026

2030

Grant element of new borrowing (% right scale)

c.PV of debt-to-exports ratio

1400

d.PV of debt-to-revenue ratio

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800
600
600
400

400

200

200
0
2011

2016

2021

2026

2030

e.Debt service-to-exports ratio

140

0
2011

2021

2026

2030

f.Debt service-to-revenue ratio

120

120

2016

100

100

80

80
60
60
40

40

20

20

0

0
2011

2016
Baseline

2021

2026

2030

Lower Sources and Uses of Funds

2011

2016
Threshold

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.

2021

2026
Lower growth

2030

16

Figure 4. Afghanistan: Indicators of Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2011-30 1/
Baseline

Lower Sources and Uses of Funds

Lower growth

180

PV of Debt-to-GDP Ratio

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2011

2015

2019

2023

2027

2030

800

PV of Debt-to-Revenue Ratio

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2011

40

2015

2019

2023

2027

2030

2019

2023

2027

2030

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
2011

2015

Sources: Country authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1/ Revenues are defined inclusive of grants.

Statement by the IMF Staff Representative on the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
November 14, 2011
This statement updates Directors on the status of the two remaining prior actions: (1) a
strategy to enforce Afghan laws in relation to crimes committed at Kabul Bank; and
(2) finalizing legally binding agreements with Kabul Bank shareholders. The first prior
action has been completed, but the second is partially completed. Staff believes that the
partial completion of the second prior action is regrettable, but considers that progress is
sufficient to allow the Fund to move forward with a program. Staff will continue to monitor
closely the status of asset recovery, and this would be a focus of the first review under the
proposed program. These developments do affect the staff assessment.
Strategy to enforce Afghan laws in relation to any financial crimes committed at Kabul
Bank—completed on November 3, 2011.
1.
The Attorney General made a statement “On Progress in Prosecution of Economic
Crimes in Afghanistan and Development of [an] Economic Crimes Strategy” on
October 19, 2011. It was published on the internet at http://ago.gov.af/en/page/4811 on
November 3, 2011.
2.
The statement elaborates the government’s two overarching objectives of punishing
any violation of Afghan laws and maximizing asset recovery, and explains how these two
considerations are being balanced. For example, the two main shareholders have been taken
into custody, but are being periodically released under close supervision to facilitate asset
recovery. The authorities have stated their intent to enforce Afghan laws regarding any
criminal wrongdoing, and are in the process of completing their investigations and preparing
the legal cases. In the coming year, the government also intends to review the systemic
failures that led to the Kabul Bank collapse, develop a comprehensive strategy to improve
institutional structures, and build capacity to prevent and promptly respond to economic
crimes.
Finalize legally binding agreements with cooperating Kabul Bank shareholders for the
repayment of the full amounts attributed to them as of date, and identifying collateral
and cash repayments to be made—partially completed as of November 9, 2011.
3.
Since the staff report was finalized, staff has reviewed individual agreements which
the authorities have made available to document the progress they have made on asset
recovery under this prior action. This review has revealed some weaknesses in the
agreements, which led staff to conclude that the prior action was met only partially.

2
4.
To date, the authorities have signed 21 agreements with eight former Kabul Bank
shareholders and related parties over repayment of US$270 million out of US$935 million in
total assets sought for recovery.1 In addition, they have US$153 million in ceded assets
available for sale outside such agreements.2 The remainder is largely still disputed between
the receiver and the ultimate beneficiaries.


Legally binding nature: The authorities have assured staff that these agreements are
legally binding in Afghanistan, noting that US$36 million in payments under these
agreements have been received through end-October.3 Staff confirms that the
agreements reviewed thus far include the key elements one would generally expect to
see in a legally binding document: the parties involved, the date of agreement, an
acknowledgement of amounts owed, the interest rate, and a reference to a repayment
schedule. However, in terms of specificity, the overall quality of the agreements
appears to fall short of what one might see in other jurisdictions. The enforceability of
the agreements through the courts has yet to be tested, and there is a risk that
individuals may default on their payments in the future.



Cooperating shareholders: Staff notes that one of the main shareholders allegedly
responsible for a majority of the alleged fraud has thus far shown only limited
cooperation and has not yet agreed to sign any agreements himself until amounts
attributable to him are established. Two other former shareholders are also not
cooperating and have not signed agreements.



Amounts attributed: The agreements cover the full amounts attributed to the
cooperating shareholders and related parties with one exception.4 The authorities
acknowledge that the amounts in some of the agreements may need to be revised once
the final report of the forensic audit is available; the report is expected to provide
substantiated information on the amounts attributed to the individuals. In this regard,
it is understood that these repayment agreements do not preclude attribution of
additional amounts owed.



Collateral and repayment schedule: While the level of specificity varies across the
agreements, the agreements purport to pledge collateral and establish cash installment
repayment schedules. In this regard, most of the agreements refer to collateral in
general terms, and only some identify specific assets. The receiver is working with

1

Kabul Bank had 16 shareholders of which 11 have allegedly benefited from the fraud.

2

These assets include real estate in Afghanistan and Dubai.

3

In addition, debt service payments on regular Kabul Bank loans have been made, and a total of US$75 million
has been received in cash as reported in the MEFP.

4

In one instance, the agreement is for a lower amount than what is attributed to the party because the authorities
believe that if they had insisted on the full amount, the party would have had to declare bankruptcy.

3
the individuals to identify specific assets that can serve as collateral and estimate their
market value. Moreover, the agreements also include a provision that the receiver can
take recourse to all of the signing parties’ assets if those already identified cannot
cover the amounts owed.
5.
It should also be noted that the authorities have not precluded asset recovery through
the criminal justice system and mutual legal assistance from other countries. They have
specifically asked a reputable international audit firm help them with this, as well as with a
global asset trace. They have also sought dedicated training in this regard from the World
Bank, and have discussed asset recovery via the criminal justice system with Fund staff since
September 2010.
Staff Appraisal
Staff views the prior action on legally binding agreements as being partially met, mainly
because the collateral is not always fully specified, and at least in one instance a lower
amount than what is believed to be the case has been attributed. While this is regrettable,
staff notes that the authorities have made significant progress to date, while disentangling the
fraudulent loan book has turned out to be more challenging than initially anticipated. The
authorities’ next steps will have to be informed by the outcome of the ongoing forensic audit
which should be finalized by March 2012. It is expected that the audit results could lead to
upward revisions of some agreements, though downward revisions cannot be ruled out. Staff
will continue to monitor closely the status of asset recovery from Kabul Bank shareholders
and related parties, including finalizing legally binding agreements and cash recoveries.
Progress on these two areas would be a focus of the first review under the proposed program.

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 11/140
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 16, 2011

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Concludes 2011 Article IV Consultation with
Afghanistan
On November 14, 2011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded the Article IV consultation with Afghanistan.
Background
Afghanistan has made important achievements in recent years. The authorities have
taken steps to lay the foundation for economic stability and growth, despite a very
difficult security situation and the challenges associated with building political and
economic institutions. As a result, economic activity has been robust, with real GDP
growth averaging more than 10 percent annually over the last five years (8 percent in
2010/11). The government has increased revenue collection to 11 percent of GDP in
2010/11 from 8 percent in 2008/09. Still, current collection levels cover only about twothirds of central government operating expenditures and less than 20 percent of total
public spending (defined as central government spending plus off-budget donor
spending). Headline and core inflation have moderated slightly, but remain relatively
high at about 10 percent year-on-year in September.



Under Article IV of the IMF's Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with
members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial
information, and discusses with officials the country's economic developments and policies.
On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion
by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as
Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is
transmitted to the country's authorities. An explanation of any qualifiers used in summings
up can be found here: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/misc/qualifiers.htm.

2
Last year’s crisis at Kabul Bank, the largest bank in Afghanistan, exposed the country’s
serious governance problems, and highlighted the devastating effects of endemic
corruption. The initial intervention by the central bank and the government’s decision to
provide a full deposit guarantee prevented a full-blown banking crisis. However, the
subsequent crisis management was slow, and somewhat reluctant to tackle some
important but politically difficult issues such as asset recovery and filing charges against
the main architects of the fraud. As a result, the financial system has been severely
weakened and is not playing its role in facilitating private sector led growth.
Over the coming three to five years, Afghanistan will face additional challenges as the
international military presence is wound down and the government has to take over
spending currently financed by donors. Foreign troops are expected to gradually
withdraw by 2014. As a result, Afghanistan’s security forces will have to take over more
responsibility, leading to higher spending. At the same time, the government may lose
revenues related to spending by foreign troops in Afghanistan. Moreover, it is likely that
total grants decline from an estimated over 40 percent of GDP in 2010/11 to less than
30 percent of GDP in 2013/14.
These developments will weigh heavily on economic activity and require difficult
decisions. Fiscal policy will need to accommodate growing spending pressures, while
domestic revenue is likely to be adversely affected, the future level of budget grants is
uncertain, and Afghanistan has limited scope for foreign borrowing. Therefore, the
government will struggle to make ends meet in the near term. Moreover, the withdrawal
of the international presence will entail lower foreign inflows that will require external
adjustment, initially through competitiveness gains.
In this context, making quick progress towards Afghanistan’s social and development
objectives will be challenging. Afghanistan remains one of the poorest countries in the
world, with a per-capita income of US$530 in 2010/11 and a national poverty rate of 36
percent in 2007/08. The authorities have made inroads toward achieving some of the
Millennium Development Goals. For example, child mortality was reduced and school
enrollment increased, albeit from very low levels—the enrollment rate for primary
schools is less than 40 percent. At the same time, the authorities also acknowledge that
achievements in some areas are below expectations: more than 40 percent of children
under the age of five are underweight; progress in increasing access to potable water
and sanitation remains slow; and the literacy rates for men and women aged 15 to 24
are 51 and 22 percent respectively. Overall, the low execution rate of only 40 percent of
the development budget reflects a generally limited absorption capacity, and impedes
more rapid progress toward poverty reduction.
Executive Board Assessment
Executive Directors commended the authorities for the important achievements in recent
years, despite the difficult political and security environment. Economic growth has been
strong, the fiscal position has improved, inflation has remained moderate until recently,

3
and the central bank has built up international reserves. There has also been
improvement in some poverty indicators.
Directors agreed that the Extended Credit Facility (ECF)-supported program,
accompanied by a technical assistance agenda, provides an appropriate framework for
addressing the considerable challenges lying ahead, and a basis for continued
engagement with the donor community. They highlighted in particular the importance of
enhancing financial sector stability, strengthening revenue performance and expenditure
management, improving the business environment, and reducing poverty. Noting the
significant risks to the program, Directors stressed that strong commitment and
ownership by the authorities of the program will be paramount.
Directors acknowledged the initial actions taken by the authorities to contain the crisis at
Kabul Bank. However, subsequent efforts to manage the crisis have been slow.
Directors urged the authorities to step up efforts in the areas of asset recovery, and
ensure that banking regulations and relevant laws are fully enforced, including by
bringing charges against the architects of the fraud. They stressed the importance of
fully meeting the relevant prior action before the first review under the program.
Directors also urged the authorities to press ahead with efforts to strengthen financial
sector supervision and the overall legal and regulatory framework, including the Anti
Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) framework.
Restoring confidence in the banking system will be important for Afghanistan’s
economic development in the upcoming transition period.
Directors noted that the planned withdrawal of foreign troops and the expected gradual
decline of donor support will have implications for growth, external adjustment, and the
fiscal position, which will need to be managed carefully. While welcoming the progress
on revenue generation, Directors encouraged the authorities to aim for more ambitious
targets to ensure fiscal and debt sustainability. Expediting the introduction of the Value
Added Tax (VAT), improving revenue administration, and consideration of additional
measures if needed would be important steps in this regard. On the expenditure side,
public financial management reforms will ensure effective prioritization of spending,
especially pro-poor spending.
Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to tighten monetary policy to address
inflation concerns. For monetary policy to be effective, they encouraged the authorities
to enhance the independence of the central bank and reach an agreement on the capital
requirement of the bank.
Directors stressed that significantly enhancing governance and taking wide-ranging
measures to combat corruption and address the illicit economy are critical for
Afghanistan’s economic development. They urged the authorities to implement reforms
to improve the business environment, while maintaining a policy focus on inclusive
growth and poverty reduction. Addressing delays in public enterprise reform and

4
developing a framework to fully realize the potential from mineral resources will also be
important.

Public Information Notices (PINs) form part of the IMF's efforts to promote transparency of the IMF's
views and analysis of economic developments and policies. With the consent of the country
(or countries) concerned, PINs are issued after Executive Board discussions of Article IV consultations
with member countries, of its surveillance of developments at the regional level, of post-program
monitoring, and of ex post assessments of member countries with longer-term program engagements.
PINs are also issued after Executive Board discussions of general policy matters, unless otherwise
decided by the Executive Board in a particular case.

5

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006/07–2011/12
(Population: approx. 30 million; 2010/11)
(Per capita GDP: US$530; 2010/11)
(Poverty rate: 36 percent; 2007/08)
2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12
Prel.
Proj.
1

Output and prices
Real GDP
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)
2
Consumer prices (period average)
Public finances
Domestic revenues and grants
Domestic revenues
Grants
Expenditures
3
Operating
Development
Overall balance (including grants)
4
Operating balance (excluding grants)
Monetary sector
Reserve money
Broad money
1

External sector
5
Exports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change)
Imports of goods (in U.S. dollars, percentage change)
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Foreign direct investment
6
Total external debt
Gross international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars)
7
(Import coverage)
Afghanis per U.S. dollar (average)

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
5.6
13.7
3.6
21.0
8.4
5.7
7.1
8.7
10.5
12.5
15.9
18.4
5.1
13.0
26.8
-12.2
7.7
10.5
18.3
8.2
10.2
21.5
12.3
9.2
-3.1
-4.2

19.9
7.7
12.3
22.0
11.6
10.3
-2.0
-4.0

17.5
7.8
9.8
21.7
13.1
8.6
-4.1
-5.3

20.5
10.3
10.2
22.1
14.5
7.6
-1.6
-4.2

22.0
11.0
11.0
21.1
15.1
5.9
0.9
-4.1

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
22.3
14.4
64.9
17.1
21.3
18.8
...
31.0
35.9
39.3
22.6
18.3
(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
1.4
1.8
33.0
2.1
12.7
10.0
15.6
14.8
-0.8
3.0
-71.1
-5.6
2.7
169.6
2,040
3.4
49.9

-68.1
1.3
2.8
23.0
2,784
4.1
49.8

-59.6
0.9
2.9
19.7
3,591
5.3
51.0

-51.3
-2.8
2.4
9.2
4,209
6.0
49.3

-39.8
1.7
2.1
8.0
5,321
7.4
45.8

Memorandum items:
Opium production (in tons)
6,100
8,200
7,700
6,900
3,600
8
55.4
57.4
49.3
39.9
30.5
External budget grants
Source: Afghan authorities; United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and IMFstaff estimates and projections.
1

Excluding the narcotics economy.
For Kabul only.
3
Comprising mainly current spending.
4
Defined as domestic revenues minus operating expenditures.
5
Includes official recorded exports, estimates of smuggling, reexports and sales to nonresidents.
6
After debt relief.
7
Gross reserves in months of next year's imports of goods and services, excluding imports for reexport.
8
Estimated direct expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the government budget.
2

23.7
11.5
12.2
23.8
17.6
6.2
0.0
-6.1

2.5
0.4
-34.3
0.1
2.1
7.9
6,121
8.4
...
...
22.1

Press Release No. 11/412
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
November 15, 2011

International Monetary Fund
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

IMF Executive Board Approves US$133.6 Million Arrangement Under the Extended
Credit Facility for the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
The Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today approved a three year,
SDR 85 million (about US$133.6 million) arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility
(ECF) for Afghanistan which is designed to support the nation's economic program from
2011 to 2014. The approval will immediately enable an initial disbursement of an amount
equivalent to SDR 12 million (about US$18.9 million).
The IMF-supported economic program’s key objectives are to make significant progress
toward a stable and sustainable macroeconomic position while managing the challenges of
the withdrawal of the international presence in Afghanistan; strengthening the banking
system and addressing the governance and accountability issues highlighted by the Kabul
Bank crisis; moving toward fiscal sustainability; and improving the transparency and
efficiency of public spending and services to protect the poor.
Following the Executive Board's discussion of Afghanistan, Ms. Nemat Shafik, Deputy
Managing Director and Acting Chair, said:
“Despite a difficult political and security situation, Afghanistan has made important
achievements in recent years. Growth has averaged over 10 percent in the last five years,
inflation was moderate, and domestic revenues increased by 3 percent of GDP.
“After the collapse of Kabul Bank, the authorities took action to contain the situation and
prevent a broader financial meltdown, including providing a full deposit guarantee. Since
then, Kabul Bank was split into a good bank and a bad bank, and an in-depth audit is under
way to establish who benefited from the fraudulent activities. Asset recovery and legal
actions against the architects of the fraud have lagged and need to be pursued more
forcefully. It is important that the relevant prior action is fully met before the first review of
the program.
“Over the next three to five years, the withdrawal of the international military presence and
an expected decline in foreign aid will pose significant economic policy challenges. The

2
government will have to take over activities currently financed by donors, including
shouldering a larger share of security spending. Thus, while donor support is projected to
remain substantial, the expected gradual decline will curtail the fiscal space and require
external adjustment.
“The authorities’ three-year program, supported by the Fund’s Extended Credit Facility, will
help address these short and medium-term challenges and provide the basis for sustained
inclusive growth and poverty reduction in line with Afghanistan’s National Development
Strategy. It is important that the authorities accelerate measures to enhance governance,
including strengthening the banking law and financial sector supervision, as well as the
framework for anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. They are
also encouraged to be more ambitious on domestic revenue mobilization, which may require
measures in addition to the planned revenue administration reforms and the introduction of a
value-added tax in 2014.”
ANNEX
Recent Economic Developments
The authorities have taken steps to lay the foundation for economic stability and growth,
despite a very difficult security situation and the challenges associated with building political
and economic institutions. As a result, economic activity has been robust, with real GDP
growth averaging more than 10 percent annually over the past five years. The government
has increased revenue collection to 11 percent of GDP in 2010/11 from 8 percent in 2008/09,
though current collection levels cover only about two-thirds of central government operating
expenditures.
Some poverty indicators have improved over the last decade, but Afghanistan remains one of
the poorest countries in the world. Per-capita income was US$530 in 2010/11. The national
poverty rate was 36 percent in 2007/08, as measured by the National Risk and Vulnerability
Assessment, and the rates are higher in rural and mountainous areas that account for about 80
percent of the population.
Program Summary
Stabilizing the economy. Despite an expected decline in overall donor assistance, the
authorities’ goal is to sustain annual real GDP growth at about 6–7 percent over the next
three years, supported by an expansion in the nonagricultural sector and mining investment.
Cognizant of the negative effects of inflation, particularly on the poor, the authorities also
plan to strive to bring inflation down. Sustained donor funding and a stable economy will
support the balance of payments and provide the basis for high and inclusive growth.

3
Strengthening the banking and financial sectors. The authorities have designed and started
implementing a comprehensive strategy to strengthen the banking system, to lower fiscal
costs associated with Kabul Bank’s failure, and to address governance issues. This strategy
includes resolving Kabul Bank, drawing lessons from its failure, promoting transparency,
governance and the framework for protecting the financial system from economic crime, as
well as addressing moral hazard, and strengthening banking supervision and safeguarding a
financial system based on integrity and the rule of law.
Moving toward fiscal sustainability. Fiscal sustainability will depend on sustained
increases in revenues together with prioritized spending reflecting development and security
priorities. The program envisages an increase in domestic revenues of 0.6 percent of GDP in
the next three years. Looking beyond the program period, the planned introduction of a VAT
in March 2014 is expected to raise an additional 2 percent of GDP, and the authorities are
aiming for a revenue-to-GDP ratio of about 16 percent of GDP by 2017/18.
Prioritizing development spending. In line with the the government’s Afghanistan National
Development Strategy (ANDS), which aims at improving the delivery of government
services, aligning foreign development assistance with Afghanistan’s national priorities, and
channeling more resources through the budget. In particular, although it will be necessary to
allocate increasing amounts of spending to security, adequate resources will be allocated to
help the poor.

4

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 2006/07–2013/14
(Population: approx. 30 million; 2010/11)
(Per capita GDP: US$530; 2010/11)
(Poverty rate: 36 percent; 2007/08)
(Main export: dried fruit, US$210 million; 2009/10)
2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14
Prel.
Projection

1
Output and prices
Real GDP
Nominal GDP (in billions of U.S. dollars)
2
Consumer prices (period average)
Public finances
Domestic revenues and grants
Domestic revenues
Grants
Expenditures
3
Operating
Development
Overall balance (including grants)
Operating balance (excluding grants)
Monetary sector
Reserve money
Broad money
1
External sector
Exports of goods
(in U.S. dollars, percentage change)
Imports of goods
(in U.S. dollars, percentage change)
Merchandise trade balance
Current account balance
Excluding official transfers
Including official transfers
Foreign direct investment
6
Total external debt

4

5.6
7.1

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
13.7
3.6
21.0
8.4
5.7
7.1
8.7
10.5
12.5
15.9
18.4
19.6

5.1

13.0

26.8

-12.2

7.7

10.5

4.6

5.0

18.3
8.2
10.2
21.5

19.9
7.7
12.3
22.0

17.5
7.8
9.8
21.7

20.5
10.3
10.2
22.1

22.0
11.0
11.0
21.1

23.7
11.5
12.2
23.8

23.7
11.3
12.4
25.3

24.0
11.6
12.4
25.7

12.3
9.2
-3.1

11.6
10.3
-2.0

13.1
8.6
-4.1

14.5
7.6
-1.6

15.1
5.9
0.9

17.6
6.2
0.0

18.6
6.6
-1.6

18.7
7.0
-1.7

-4.0

-5.3

-4.2

-4.1

-6.1

-7.4

-7.1

(Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated)
14.4
64.9
17.1
21.3
18.8
17.1
31.0
35.9
39.3
22.6
18.3
15.1

16.2
17.1

-4.2
22.3
...

(In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
5

Gross international reserves
(in millions of U.S. dollars)
7
(Import coverage)
Afghanis per U.S. dollar (average)

1.4

1.8

33.0

2.1

12.7

2.5

-8.8

-3.4

10.0
-69.7

15.6
-67.9

14.8
-61.9

-0.8
-50.9

3.0
-39.6

0.4
-34.1

0.0
-33.3

0.6
-31.7

-71.1
-5.6
2.7

-68.1
1.3
2.8

-59.6
0.9
2.9

-51.3
-2.8
2.4

-39.8
1.7
2.1

-34.3
0.1
2.1

-33.2
-1.1
2.3

-31.5
-2.6
2.9

169.6

23.0

19.7

9.2

8.0

7.9

8.6

9.1

2,040
3.4
49.9

2,784
4.1
49.8

3,591
5.3
51.0

4,209
6.0
49.3

5,321
7.4
45.8

6,121
8.4
...

6,627
9.0
...

7,178
9.5
...

Memorandum items:
Opium production (in tons)
6,100
8,200
7,700
6,900
3,600
...
...
8
External budget grants
55.4
57.4
49.3
39.9
30.5
22.1
19.7
Source: Afghan authorities; United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and Fund staff estimates and projections.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

5.8
21.0

Excluding the narcotics economy.
For Kabul only.
Comprising mainly current spending.
Defined as domestic revenues plus operating budget grants minus operating expenditures.
Includes official recorded exports, estimates of smuggling, reexports and sales to nonresidents.
After debt relief.
Gross reserves in months of next year's imports of goods and services, excluding imports for reexport.
Estimated direct expenditures by donors on public projects not included in the government budget.

...
16.5

Statement by Mr. Jafar Mojarrad, Executive Director for Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan and Mr. Abdelali Jbili, Advisor To Executive Director
November 14, 2011
On behalf of our Afghan authorities, we thank management and staff for their unrelenting
efforts to bring this program to the Board, which will pave the way for Afghanistan to make
further progress in implementing its stabilization and structural reform strategy with the
needed support from the international community. Staff dedication and hard work have been
instrumental in helping the authorities deal with the difficulties caused by the near collapse of
Kabul Bank and the critical need to strengthen the financial system. The authorities have now
taken key measures to address the Kabul Bank crisis, identify and address the remaining risks
to the financial system, and are determined to vigorously pursue Afghanistan’s stabilization
and development objectives, even though the anticipated withdrawal of foreign troops and
decline in grants will make their task more challenging.
Building on the achievements in recent years, the authorities have developed a mediumterm program for which they have requested Fund support under a successor Extended
Credit Facility (ECF) arrangement. The reform agenda will seek to strengthen the
foundations of growth and poverty reduction in line with the objectives set out in the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS), while preparing to manage the impact
of reduced international presence in Afghanistan. Implementation of all prior actions, despite
the many hurdles involved, attests to the authorities’ determination in this regard.
Recent developments
Afghanistan has made important progress toward achieving its development and
poverty reduction objectives. The economy has been growing by 10 percent on average
since 2006/07, with non-agriculture sectors exhibiting strong performance; per-capita GDP
has doubled since 2005/06; inflation declined significantly during the past two years,
although it has picked up in 2010/11 in part due to higher international food and fuel prices;
and some key poverty indicators have improved: child mortality has decreased, and school
enrollment has increased, in particular for females. These achievements, which are detailed
in the staff report and the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP), must
be seen against the difficult and deteriorating security situation and the volatile global and
regional environment. This progress notwithstanding, further reducing poverty which is
unacceptably high, while achieving security and ensuring macroeconomic stability and fiscal
sustainability in an environment conducive to private sector-led growth, remains central to
the authorities’ program.
Fiscal performance improved in 2010/11, including from continued progress in revenue
mobilization and public financial management (¶ 7.MEFP). Building on the tax measures
and administrative reforms introduced earlier, domestic revenue increased by 3.2 percent of
GDP since 2008/09, and has remained buoyant, as evidenced by the 25 percent increase in

2
revenue collection during the first half of 2011/12. Tight control on non-security spending
has been maintained, thereby keeping the lid on the operating budget deficit despite
implementation of necessary pay and grading reforms and hiring of new teachers. However,
while spending on security has increased, development spending has been on a downward
trend since 2008/09, reflecting difficulty with some donors in reallocating funding, the
deteriorating security situation, and under-execution mainly related to capacity constraints in
line ministries.
The impact of the Kabul Bank crisis on financial sector development has been
contained. The staff report covers how the Kabul Bank crisis unfolded and rightly points to
the rapid growth in banking services in an environment of nascent regulation and supervision
as a key contributing factor (Boxes 3 and 4). Recognizing the risks to the stability of the
financial system, the authorities moved decisively on several fronts to contain a run on Kabul
Bank and prevent a run on other banks by guaranteeing bank deposits and putting Kabul
Bank into conservatorship. Subsequently, the authorities placed Kabul Bank into
receivership, which resulted in the revocation of all shareholders’ rights and the extinction of
their interests in the bank. The major shareholders were removed from management of this
and other banks. In addition, a comprehensive forensic audit of Kabul Bank by an
independent, internationally recognized firm commenced in June 2011.
Despite the magnitude of the crisis, critical banking transactions were never disrupted.
Payment of government wages and salaries in particular continued without
interruption. While the immediate aftermath of the crisis saw a withdrawal of funds from
the banking system as a whole, much of it has been reversed. The central bank extended a
lender-of-last resort facility to repay Kabul Bank depositors, which was subsequently made
up through recapitalization of the central bank by the government. Further progress is
underway in resolving the crisis by splitting Kabul Bank into a good bank (the New Kabul
Bank) and a bad bank, as highlighted in Box 3, accelerating the recovery of assets, and
preparing the New Kabul Bank for privatization.
Medium-term outlook
The medium-term outlook hinges on a wide range of factors and risks. Steadfast
implementation of reforms, together with improved security and regional stability and
cooperation, would support investment and growth, including in the promising mining sector.
Conversely, the withdrawal of international presence in Afghanistan and a possible decline in
donor support are likely to curb growth and adversely affect macroeconomic stability, as
highlighted in the staff scenarios (Appendix II). While it is difficult to know at this stage how
these factors will play out, the authorities are firmly determined to act on the factors that are
under their control, namely continue to increase domestic revenue, to implement their
strategy under the ANDS and the proposed program supported by the ECF arrangement,
while seeking to manage the downside risks. They look forward to the forthcoming Bonn
Conference in December 2011, which is expected to establish the economic parameters for
Afghanistan’s transition.

3
Debt sustainability
Following debt relief under the HIPC initiative and MDRI, the updated DSA concludes that
while debt burden indicators will improve over the near term, the risk of external debt
distress remains high, potentially stemming from financing with loans instead of grants, and
the withdrawal of large-scale foreign presence and increased domestically-financed security
expenditures that would reduce available resources for investment and growth. The
authorities agree with these findings and will rely primarily on grants to finance development
spending while increasing the share of domestic resources in the financing of operating
budget expenditure. They will also sustain their broad-based reform agenda, as envisaged
under the ANDS.
The economic program for 2011/12-2013/14
Growth and poverty reduction
The program aims at anchoring growth and poverty reduction objectives in
macroeconomic stability while strengthening the financial system and better preparing
the transition to the withdrawal of foreign presence in Afghanistan. The economy is
expected to grow at about 6–7 percent in 2011/12, underpinned by an expansion in the nonagricultural sector and mining investment. High priority will continue to be given to pro-poor
spending, which is expected to account for 25 percent of non-security operating spending in
2011/12.
Fiscal policies
The program aims at further strengthening domestic revenue collection, aligning
expenditure with the ANDS priorities, gradually integrating externally-financed
operating expenditure in the national budget, and further improving fiscal
management, accountability, and good governance. A broad range of fiscal measures
aimed at moving toward fiscal sustainability are planned. Domestic revenue is to increase by
0.6 percent of GDP over the program period, underpinned by sustained efforts to improve tax
administration and ongoing implementation of a business model of border customs control
that would improve collection and reduce the opportunities for corruption. Even though the
envisaged improvement in revenue over the program has already been achieved this year, the
authorities are working towards ensuring that revenue performance will be better than
programmed.
The authorities also plan to launch a major tax reform with Fund technical assistance,
including the introduction of a VAT by March 2014, which would raise additional
revenue, estimated at 2 percent of GDP. Moreover, development of the mining sector is
expected to boost revenue, and the authorities are preparing a strong and transparent fiscal
regime in this area with assistance from the World Bank and the IMF. This, together with
further steps to enhance the efficiency of tax administration, would help achieve the
authorities’ goal of bringing domestic revenue to 15.6 percent of GDP by 2017/18.

4
The planned security transition and gradual takeover of operations and maintenance of
capital projects will put pressure on spending plans, which must also accommodate the
need to increase wages to attract better qualified staff and pro-poor expenditure.
Stepped up efforts will be made to strengthen public financial management, by implementing
the Public Financial Management Road Map, with a particular focus on budget preparation
and execution, and increased transparency and accountability, as highlighted in the MEFP.
The expected channeling of an increasing share of donor support through the budget, and
development of a government securities market, should ease financing constraints and budget
implementation.
Monetary and financial sector policies
The authorities will seek to reduce inflation to about 4 to 6 percent in 2011/12. In an
effort to enhance effectiveness of monetary policy, the central bank started in 2010 using
reserve money as its operational target, while maintaining a flexible exchange rate system
that allows the rate to reflect market fundamentals. Further efforts will aim at improving
banks’ liquidity management and developing the secondary market for the central bank’s
Capital Notes to facilitate the conduct of open market operations, pending issuance of
government securities (sukuks).
The authorities are moving forward to complete the resolution of Kabul Bank. As
detailed in the MEFP and the Banking System Action Plan (Table 3), New Kabul Bank will
be put up for sale by June 2012, or if the sale does not materialize, be downsized and merged
into other financial institutions, or liquidated. Asset recovery continues to be vigorously
pursued and evidence of wrongdoing has and will be referred to law enforcement authorities.
Drawing lessons from this crisis, the authorities’ strategy seeks to strengthen the
supervision of the financial system. Wide ranging efforts are being carried out to identify
vulnerabilities in the banking system, including through onsite inspections and audits by
internationally reputable firms. An onsite inspection and audit of another large bank are
being carried out and actions have been taken to strengthen the bank’s capital, reduce its
large exposure, and address conflict-of-interest issues. Moreover, the central bank is
strengthening bank supervision and reinforcing the regulatory framework (¶ 30 and 31 of the
MEFP). Efforts to improve governance will be stepped up by strengthening the banking law,
encouraging consolidation of small banks, and upgrading the provisions on corporate
governance, large exposure, and consolidated supervision.
AML/CFT
The authorities are committed to strengthening their AML/CFT regime, as part of their
broader efforts to rid the economy of corruption, drug trafficking, and the financing of
terrorism. An action plan based on the recommendations of the February 2011 assessment
will be implemented; amendments to the AML/CFT legislation will be submitted to
parliament; and the capacity of the financial intelligence unit will be strengthened.

5
Public enterprises
The authorities will move forward in implementing the restructuring plans of the four
largest state-owned enterprises, and clarifying the legal framework governing these
enterprises to bring them under the ownership and effective control of the Ministry of
Finance. Steps will be taken to improve reporting and strengthen the capacity at the
Department of State-Owned Enterprises (¶ 46 of MEFP).
Governance issues
Consistent with the ANDS and the program outlined in the Kabul Conference
Communiqué of June 20, 2010, the authorities have taken wide-ranging measures to
strengthen governance and the rule of law, improve transparency and accountability,
and fight corruption. Major steps include the establishment of the Anti-Corruption Unit in
the Attorney General’s Office and the Anti-Corruption Court with the Supreme Court, as
well as the issuance of the President’s Decree establishing a High Office for Oversight and
Anti-Corruption for coordination of the authorities’ strategy. Monitoring of the anticorruption strategy will be carried out by an independent Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee, which was inaugurated in May 2011.
Conclusion
Afghanistan’s path toward macroeconomic stability, growth and poverty reduction has
been strewn with formidable obstacles, including security, global and regional volatility,
governance issues, and low implementation capacity. Yet, progress has been achieved in
many areas as outlined above, which should not be overshadowed by setbacks, such as the
Kabul Bank crisis. The reform agenda in the years ahead is ambitious and will require
perseverance, flexibility, and sustained donor support, within the framework of partnership
that has demonstrated its effectiveness in serving agreed objectives. The authorities highly
appreciate Fund advice and assistance, and are determined to deliver on their commitments
under the new program.

